22/03/2026, 18:22

EU competitiveness

Competitiveness

What the EU does

Growing challenges such as climate

change, artificial intelligence and
geopolitical tensions are changing the

world we live in. In order to thrive in this
new landscape, we need to ensure that
Europe is a place where growth and

innovation can continue to be fostered.  

To ensure that European businesses can

thrive in the global marketplace and to
deliver sustainable prosperity for all people

in the EU, the Commission is placing
competitiveness at the heart of its
economic agenda.

The Commissionʼs work in this area is
guided by the Draghi report and the
competitiveness compass.

Expected outcomes

€470 billion

€37.5 billion

500,000

https://commission.europa.eu/topics/competitiveness_en

1/4

22/03/2026, 18:22

EU competitiveness

additional funding
that European
companies could
raise from a more
integrated capital
market

potential annual
savings for EU
companies if we
achieve our
simplification
goals

projected new
jobs in the
European circular
economy by
2030

Sources: Speech by Commission President Ursula von der Leyen, 23 April 2024 / Communication on the

competitiveness compass

Areas of action

Competitiveness compass

Our roadmap to reignite Europeʼs dynamism and boost economic growth

Clean Industrial Deal

How we are turning decarbonisation into a driver of growth for European industries

Union of skills

Our plan to plug the labour and skills gaps that are holding back European growth

Savings and investments union

Creating better financial opportunities for EU citizens, while allowing businesses across
Europe to grow

Simplification

Reducing the administrative burden on EU companies to make doing business easier and
faster

The Draghi report

Landmark report on how Europe can restore its competitiveness

https://commission.europa.eu/topics/competitiveness_en

2/4

22/03/2026, 18:22

EU competitiveness

Key achievements

The EU provides a stable and secure framework for companies developing digital

technologies, through measures such as the Data and Data Governance Acts, the Cyber

Resilience Act and the AI Act.

More than one-fifth of the worldʼs clean technologies are developed in the EU, and

Europe is a world leader in the development of wind turbines, electrolysers and low-

carbon fuels.

The EU has the largest and fastest growing network of trade agreements in the world,

covering 76 countries. We are the number one trading partner for 72 countries,

representing 38% of world GDP. In 2022, the value of EU trade through free trade

agreements with global partners surpassed €2 trillion for the first time.

The Commission has set ambitious targets to reduce reporting requirements by at least

25% for all companies and at least 35% for SMEs, and eventually expand these
reductions to all types of administrative burden This is part of an unprecedented EU
simplification effort, which aims to encourage business dynamism and attract additional
investment to Europe.

The EU boasts a large pool of skilled workers, strong education and training systems,
and a robust welfare state. Today more than 216.5 million people, or over 75% of the
population, are employed, more than at any other time in the EUʼs history. 

In focus

EU Inc. – making business
easier in the European Union

EU Inc., a new single set of corporate

rules, will make it easier for businesses
to start, operate and grow across the

EU. Its optional, fully digital

procedures would enable innovative
companies to scale up and incentivise

them to stay in Europe and encourage

https://commission.europa.eu/topics/competitiveness_en

3/4

22/03/2026, 18:22

EU competitiveness

those who once looked elsewhere to
return.

It is part of the new broader 28th

regime that offers businesses the
chance to seize the benefits of

the single market. EU inc. will
allow faster registration and

simpler procedures, enabling a

company to set up within 48
hours, for less than €100, and only

requiring them to submit their company
information once, via an EU-level

interface.

The Commission is calling on the
European Parliament and the Council to

reach an agreement on the EU Inc.
proposal by the end of 2026.

Learn more

Related links

Priorities 20242029 Competitiveness

The European semester

This page was last updated on 18 March 2026

https://commission.europa.eu/topics/competitiveness_en

4/4

