Perspectives 
from the Global 
Telecom Outlook, 
2025–2029

Table of contents

01  Introduction: Opportunities amid adversity 

02  Five forces shaping the telecom industry 

03  Capitalising on the AI infrastructure investment super‑cycle 

04  Reinventing telecom business models 

05  Shifting to AI‑native operations with ‘TelcOS’ 

Author 

03

07

14

19

23

27

The takeaways

• Global telecom 

traffic is soaring amid 
flat-to-down ARPU 

and modest revenue 

growth, making 

AI‑enabled cost 

control and efficiency 

essential.

• AI and data 

centres are driving 

a new infrastructure 

investment super‑

cycle. Telecoms can 

capture growth by 

delivering AI‑era 

connectivity and 

sovereignty solutions.

• To stay competitive, 

operators are adopting 

simpler ‘puretone’ 

portfolio models and 

AI‑native ‘TelcOS’ 

operations.

01

3

Introduction: 
Opportunities amid 
adversity

In recent years, telecom operators have paved new information highways 

in the form of 5G for mobile devices and fibre-optic lines for homes and 

businesses. Now those highways are becoming more crowded. With each 

passing day, billions of users stream more and sharper video, move data 

in real time, connect cars and factories, and increasingly use artificial 

intelligence (AI)-powered services. But in a continuation of a long-standing 

trend, while usage by all measures is soaring, revenue isn’t. According to 

PwC’s Global Telecom Outlook, global telecom service revenue is set to rise 

from US$1.15 trillion in 2024 to roughly $1.32 trillion in 2029, representing a 

steady, but unremarkable, compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of  

around 2.8%. 

The underlying reason for the sombre revenue outlook? Consumers’ flat-to-down 

willingness to pay. Although regional growth rates vary widely, monthly average 

revenue per user (ARPU) globally for mobile is expected to tick down marginally 

to $6.20 in 2029 from $6.32 in 2024. What’s more, fixed broadband ARPU inched 

up to only $19.81 in 2024 from $19.73 in 2023, dampened by a decline in fixed 
voice revenue that will cause overall fixed ARPU to keep falling throughout the 

studied period. The combination of slow revenue growth and declining ARPU is a 

structural change, requiring a resetting of the telecom margin model. Integrating 

AI can help by lowering service costs, reducing downtime, improving capital 

allocation, and raising productivity—but only if paired with product simplification, 

legacy shutdowns, footprint reduction, and vendor consolidation.

PwC4

Growth moderates

PwCGlobal telecom revenue continues to grow steadily, though at a slightly reduced rate.202020212022202320242025202620272028202964266168971274477379982384786924926928830832534035436738139311110294898478736864601,0011,0321,0721,1091,1531,1911,2251,2591,2911,323Global telecom revenue by service type (US$bn)Note: Totals may not equal sums shown due to rounding.Source: PwC’s Global Telecom Outlook 2025–2029, OmdiaMobileFixed broadbandFixed voiceForecastForecast+3.6%+2.8%5

Usage outpaces revenue

PwCNetwork usage is accelerating far faster than ARPU, widening the monetisation gap2020202120222023202420252026202720282029Telecom data consumption (zetabytes) and average revenue per user (ARPU, US$)Source: PwC’s Global Telecom Outlook 2025–2029, OmdiaForecast$7.07$6.94$6.76$6.48$6.32$6.22$6.17$6.16$6.17$6.20$12.00$11.28$10.53$10.15$9.74$9.27$8.84$8.44$8.09$7.77$19.71$19.79$19.7$19.73$19.81$19.82$19.88$19.97$20.06$20.151.7 ZB2.2 ZB2.7 ZB3.1 ZB3.6 ZB4 ZB4.5 ZB5.1 ZB5.7 ZB6.3 ZB0.4 ZB0.4 ZB0.8 ZB0.4 ZB0.5 ZB0.6 ZB0.7 ZB1 ZB1.2 ZB1.4 ZB1.7 ZB2 ZBFixed broadband and WiFiMobileFixed voice ARPUFixed broadband ARPUMobile ARPU6

Meanwhile, with value in motion across the global economy, two other parts 
of the digital landscape are accelerating at a head‑snapping pace: AI and data 

centres. Hyperscalers and investors are racing to build large compute clusters 

that require high‑capacity, low‑latency, reliable interconnection. They will secure 

connectivity the fastest and cheapest way possible: buy fibre from operators—or 

build their own.

Here’s the fundamental risk: Telecoms’ capex spending on long-lived assets like 

towers, radios, and fibre as a share of revenue stepped down from 26.9% in 2022 

to 22.9% in 2024, though we expect it to register a marginally positive 0.62% 

CAGR later in the period as 5G‑Advanced and early 6G roll out. But if backhaul 

and data centre interconnect don’t keep pace, the compute economy will grow 

around the networks operators built.

This shift creates a choice. Defend a shrinking margin pool or reposition around 

AI infrastructure. That means investing where traffic and capital are concentrating, 

simplifying the portfolio, and aligning the operating model to capture data centre, 

fibre, and edge demand.

Despite these significant challenges, the AI and data centre story presents 

tremendous opportunities for efficiency, growth, and fundamental reinvention.  

In this article, we explain how telecom operators can leverage AI and the 

associated infrastructure buildout to accelerate their growth. We share where  

the money will flow; what to build (and where); and why many telecoms are 
reshaping themselves into simpler, more focused businesses to match where 
value is shifting.

PwC02

7

Five forces shaping 
the telecom industry

Telecoms are striving to maintain their position and relevance in the connect and 
compute value chain and increase the value they create. It’s a tough ask, one 
that’s made more challenging by widely differing market dynamics and growth 

rates in worldwide territories. (See “Regional and country trends” on page 12.)

As telecoms look to develop their strategies for success in this fragmented global 

environment, they must take account of five forces fundamentally reshaping the 

economics of the telecom industry. 

Fibre first—with FWA as a filler. Globally, fibre is now the upgrade path of 
choice, with fixed wireless access (FWA) serving as a bridge technology that 

uses headroom capacity on 4G/5G mobile networks to provide fixed broadband 

connectivity wirelessly to homes and businesses. For operators, the goal with 
FWA is to ride the fibre wave and tap into monetisation opportunities beyond 
the pure speed that fibre offers. For consumers, this might mean pairing 
multi‑gig tiers with managed Wi‑Fi, cybersecurity, smart home, and gaming/
assured‑latency bundles. For enterprise customers, it means leaning on software‑
defined wide area networks (SD-WAN), secure access service edge (SASE), and 
edge security. 

PwC8

The migration to fibre is being led by countries such as Singapore, now an 

all-fibre nation pushing towards 10 gigabits per second (Gbps), and China, which 

has 206.8 million gigabit fibre users and 10 Gbps pilots underway. Ongoing fibre 

expansion in markets such as France, Japan, the UAE, and Switzerland further 

underlines the readiness for 5–10 Gbps positioning.

Fibre reshapes regional markets

PwCChina stands out with unmatched ﬁbre penetration and scale economics.Note: Latin America is representative of Mexico, Central America, and South America.Source: PwC’s Global Telecom Outlook 2025–2029, OmdiaBubble size = forecast 2029 total subscriptions (US$bn)Fixed broadband subscriptions vs. ARPU (as CAGR, 2024-29)Subscriber growthRevenue growth (ARPU)ChinaUS$0.8bn-2.0%1.0%2.0%3.0%4.0%5.0%6.0%7.0%8.0%-1.5%-1.0%-0.5%0.0%0.5%1.0%1.5%2.0%2.5%3.0%3.5%Eastern EuropeUS$0.1bnCanada and the USUS$0.2bnWestern EuropeUS$0.2bnLatin AmericaUS$0.1bnAsia-Paciﬁc (ex-China)US$0.3bnMiddle East and AfricaUS$0.1bn9

5G and ﬁbre rise

PwCForecastForecastEmerging access platforms are rapidly becoming dominant as legacy technologies fade.Global telecom subscription penetration for 5G, 4G, ﬁbre, legacy, and ﬁxed wireless (%)20202021202220232024202520262027202820295G4GFibreLegacyFixedwireless39162639567698117130951061131181191129983696017202427293235384042312927252321201816152333456778Note: Fibre data excludes China. Legacy data is a combination of DSL and cable.Source: PwC’s Global Telecom Outlook 2025–2029, Omdia10

Surgical deployment of 5G SA and 5G-Advanced. Given the tight return 
on invested capital (ROIC), operators are carefully pacing their rollouts of 5G 

Standalone (5G SA). They’re mostly choosing to invest in cases where slicing/

FWA, campus networks, and enterprise service-level agreements (SLAs) can 

provide a decent payback. Here, different territories are offering tactical cues 

on both building scale and aligning capex with regulation. On scale, China is 

piloting 5G‑Advanced widely, with 4.2 million 5G sites and concerted commercial 

promotion efforts; India has moved early to conduct one of the few nationwide SA 

deployments to date. On capex/regulatory alignment, 5G SA in Germany is being 
marketed as “5G+,” reflecting the government’s commitment to becoming a 
leading market for 5G networks and applications. 

Capex discipline and asset-light models. As capex intensity declines and 
capital costs rise, operators need to keep balance sheets flexible and aligned 

with infrastructure time horizons. Actions targeted to achieve these goals include 

expanding TowerCo, neutral fibre, sharing strategies, and wholesale models. 

Asset separations can also play a role, as with the 2024 Telecom Italia SpA 

TIM NetCo carve-out in Italy that set a precedent for Europe. And selective 

consolidation is set to continue to reset market structures and support efforts to 

lift 5G quality in some territories. Examples to date include the 2025 Vodafone–

Three merger in the UK, and two mobile mergers in Taiwan that created a three–

mobile network operator (MNO) market from 2023.

IOT stacks climbing towards platforms. As IOT solutions evolve and escalate 
to the platform level, the reality remains that most growth in IOT value tends 
to accrue to application enablement platform (AEP) and consulting providers, 
not to telecom operators. PwC’s Global Telecom Outlook projects a roughly 
31% CAGR for AEPs from 2024 to 2029 and nearly $250 billion in revenue in 
2029 as connectivity revenues hold steady for the period, below $10 billion 
in annual revenues. To counter this imbalance, telecoms are looking to move 
beyond pursuing relatively low‑margin connectivity. They are instead seeking to 
prioritise AEP-led solutions and vertical plays in such segments as smart cities 

and automotive. This shift will build momentum for embedded SIMs (eSIM/

iSIM), hybrid terrestrial–satellite coverage, and lower-complexity 5G connectivity 

for IOT devices using Reduced Capability (RedCap) and enhanced Reduced 

Capability (eRedCap) profiles, as 5G SA coverage expands. Regional leaders in 

PwC11

the evolution of IOT include the US (AEP implementation at scale), Germany (AEP 

implementation at pace), and the UAE and South Korea (fast growth rates off 

relatively smaller bases). 

AI everywhere—as both lever and load. AI can bring enhanced efficiency 
and effectiveness to every functional domain: marketing and sales, customer 
operations, IT, software development/engineering, network and field operations, 

and the back office. In fact, AI will ultimately become the operating fabric on 

which telecoms run. Yet it also adds demand from AI‑related services and 

applications. An important consideration here is the bifurcated impact of data 

traffic driven by AI inference (i.e. user-originated and agent-to-agent traffic) 

and model training (i.e. traffic between hyperscale/large compute clusters). AI 

inference doesn’t yet add much traffic on public networks, as it mainly shifts 

patterns from ‘mostly download’ to ‘more balanced upload and download.’ But 

it does have a more meaningful second‑order effect on data centre interconnect 

(DCI) networks, as user requests trigger clusters talking to one another. By 

contrast, AI model training is driving massive traffic growth and upgrades in the 

backbone. But this growth generally stays within the data centre networks, and 

doesn’t impact the public networks operated by telecoms—and hence doesn’t 

show up in their capex agenda. 

PwC12

Regional and country trends

Differing growth rates worldwide are mirrored by varying market trends and 
pressures at a regional and country level. In Asia-Pacific, China has the world’s 
largest footprint in both fibre and 5G; its downwards pressure on mobile ARPU is 

offset by growing enterprise demand. And although India is still underpenetrated 

on fixed broadband at just 15.5% in 2024, fixed broadband subscriptions will 

nearly double to 95.8 million by 2029, driven by fibre and 5G fixed wireless 

access (FWA). 

Meanwhile, in North America, the US is approaching a tipping point from cable 
to fibre, with once-dominant cable connectivity steadily ceding market share and 

on a downwards path to lose first place during 2026. Canada is marginally ahead 

in this regard, with fibre having overtaken cable in 2025. 

The rise of fibre is also a consistent theme in Europe: France already has 73% 
fibre subscriptions and a planned copper switch-off by 2030; the UK is set to see 

fibre subscriptions accelerate towards 70% by 2029 amid consolidation among 

altnets; Germany will see fibre’s share of subscriptions rise from 16% at the 

end of 2024 to nearly 50% by 2029 (though it will be slowed by VDSL/DOCSIS 

incumbency); and in Romania, fibre already accounts for 80.5% of subscriptions. 

In the Middle East and Africa, the UAE has 100% 5G coverage and the fastest 
IOT revenue growth of any market (40.1% CAGR), and 5–10 Gbps fibre-to-
the-home (FTTH) retail plans have also launched. In Saudi Arabia, FWA is the 
fastest-growing fixed segment, and both fibre and the IOT are being lifted by the 
country’s ambitious smart-city agenda. And in South Africa, fibre and FWA are 
expanding rapidly, with fixed subscriptions set to grow at an 8.1% CAGR to 13.1 
million by 2029. 

Meanwhile, in Latin America, Brazil’s 36.3 million FTTH connections (74% 
of fixed lines) make it the world’s third biggest FTTH market. In Mexico, high 
spectrum fees are curbing 5G, and total sector capex is set to fall at a –0.7% 

CAGR through to 2029.

PwC  
13

The geo-economic kickers: Tariffs, fragmentation, and 
sovereignty influence where to invest

The change drivers outlined here are now being overlaid by the impacts of 

geopolitical factors—as trade policy, tariffs, and restrictions emerge as structural 
drivers of where telecom and tech value chains get built. PwC’s latest analysis 
highlights a fracturing geo‑economic environment: Accelerating equipment 

bans, shifting tariff schedules, sovereignty requirements, and regionalisation are 

pushing companies to friend‑shore/near‑shore manufacturing and localise data/

storage. For telecoms and data centres, that translates into higher costs for 

servers, optics, cooling, and backup power; more complex sourcing; and the 

need to redesign network and facility architectures for resilience.

The tariff overhang is material. Under current proposals, PwC estimates that 
annual US tariff measures affecting technology, media, and telecommunications 

(TMT) supply chains could rise from around $76 billion to nearly $697 billion, 

before accounting for any retaliation on the part of other countries—raising 

hardware costs, elongating lead times, and complicating capital planning. In the 
face of these shifts, PwC’s analysis highlights five strategic actions that telecom 
and tech leaders can take now to help withstand tariff disruption and derisk 

supply chain vulnerabilities: map the company’s exposure across all dimensions; 

build scenario resilience through response playbooks; rethink vendor strategy 

and relationships; embrace software-first design to reduce dependency on 

specialised hardware; and integrate sustainability into strategy, including adopting 

circular models.

The geopolitical situation is not just an abstract or emerging risk to operators. 
Their responses to these risks are already apparent in actions such as capex 
phasing (network softwarisation to reduce hardware exposure), vendor 
diversification, and new regional build choices. The data centre side is reacting 
in kind, through moves such as pairing siting decisions with grid participation 
(demand response, on-site generation) and emphasising local economic 
multipliers to secure permits and power. 

PwC03

14

Capitalising on the 
AI infrastructure 
investment super‑cycle

As we highlighted earlier, over the next five years, we will see two capex cycles 

diverge. 

Telecoms’ capex intensity is easing after a decade of 5G and fibre build. 

According to the Global Telecom Outlook findings, capex will lag revenue growth 

through 2029 as many markets approach the end of their 5G non‑standalone 

(NSA) and first-wave fibre cycles.

On the other side, AI infrastructure is accelerating into a multiyear super‑cycle. 

Capital is flowing into hyperscale campuses, power-hungry AI clusters, and 

adjacencies such as grid interconnects and onsite power generation. Data 
centres are now framed as ‘backbone’ infrastructure for the digital economy, 
with investors pushing to scale quickly while hardening against supply chain and 
power constraints. The recent series of large‑ticket deals underscores the trend, 
and points to continued private-capital interest in AI‑ready capacity. 

Examples include the $500 billion Stargate Project AI infrastructure investment 
in the US, involving OpenAI, Oracle, Japan’s Softbank, and the UAE’s MGX; 
the EU’s €20 billion (US$23.5 billion) InvestAI and AI Gigafactory programme, 

backed by the European Investment Bank; and Saudi Arabia’s $100 billion Project 

Transcendence, focused on making Saudi Arabia a world leader in AI  

and analytics. 

PwC15

Capex cools

At first glance, the mismatch between the telecom network and AI infrastructure 
capex cycles looks dramatic, threatening to decouple compute from connectivity. 
However, overlay these contrasting cycles with today’s geopolitical fracturing 

and advancing sovereignty agenda, and what emerges is a once‑in‑a‑generation 

opportunity for legacy carriers. 

PwCOperators are moderating capex intensity as 5G and ﬁbre deployment cycles mature.Global telecom capex ($USbn) and capex-to-revenue ratio (%) for ﬁxed broadband and mobile2020202120222023202420252026202720282029Source: PwC’s Global Telecom Outlook 2025–2029, Omdia41%40%39%36%35%34%34%33%33%33%21%22%20%18%16%16%15%15%14%14%28%28%27%24%23%22%22%21%21%21%$134$143$140$126$122$121$121$121$122$125$147$148$148$144$142$143$144$145$146$148FixedMobileMobile capex intensityTotal capex intensityFixed capex intensityForecastForecast+0.6%-1.5%16

One play here for telecoms is participating in the AI infrastructure super‑cycle 

not just as providers of DCI, but as investors in assets such as data centres and 

edge infrastructure. But more importantly, factors that used to be constraints 

for telecoms globally—territorial licence, regulatory oversight, universal 

service obligations—are now becoming assets. In a world where sovereign 

AI infrastructure, AI models, and supply chains are increasingly mandated or 

strongly preferred, operators can carve out national ‘mega‑scaler’ roles that 

global platforms cannot easily penetrate or replicate. 

We see four arenas where telecoms have both a right to play and—with the 

appropriate degree of focus—a good chance of winning:

Enterprise and wholesale connectivity for AI-era workloads. Telecoms can 
build and price for east-west traffic, while also prioritising 10/400 Gbps backhaul 

upgrades, DCI wave services, dark-fibre/managed wavelength products, and 

low-jitter metro rings tuned for AI training/serving. Where grid and planning allow, 

they might co-site edge rooms (Tier 2/3, 100–500 kW) on their own premises to 

terminate DCI and host latency‑sensitive micro‑clusters.

Converged consumer/small- and midsize-business broadband as the 
national access fabric. To play in this space, telecoms can continue migrating 
households and small businesses to gigabit-class fibre and 5G, including FWA, 

using mobile/fixed network convergence and bundle economics to bolster ARPU 

in a flat macro environment. Governments and investors value this ubiquitous, 
regulated layer, seeing it as critical to domestic AI adoption and national 
productivity. The global data shows broadband ARPU is stable or slightly rising 
as fibre’s share climbs—underlining the fact that quality can still be monetised. 
All this points to the opportunity to integrate AI into the converged bundle value 
proposition. Operators are already adding AI applications to their subscription 
bundles as perks in the same way they offer various streaming services.

Sovereign cloud, GPU-as-a-Service (GPUaaS), and trusted edge for 
resilience, national security, and regulatory needs. Telecoms can partner with 
sovereign capital and national clouds to complement, not replace, hyperscalers—

providing domestically sited capacity that satisfies national security and defence 

needs as well as residency, sectoral, and security controls in sectors such as 

PwC17

health, finance, and government. PwC’s deal and macro signals indicate that 
investor appetite for AI infrastructure remains high. Telecoms can capitalise by 

anchoring the connectivity‑plus‑compliance layer that makes sovereign AI usable 

at scale. Additionally, rising defence spending, especially in Europe, means 

the sovereign information and communications technology (ICT) opportunity 

for telecoms will accelerate given the pivotal role digital and communications 

technology plays in military and defence applications, including cybersecurity. 

Hybrid terrestrial–non-terrestrial connectivity as a resilience layer. Steps 
here can include securing satellite capacity to harden rural backhaul and critical 

routes, while preparing for direct‑to‑device augmentation to enhance population 

coverage, public safety, and IOT continuity. Telecoms might also bundle satellite 

with multiprotocol label switching (MPLS)/SD-WAN and 5G slicing to deliver 

SLA‑backed reach for distributed AI data ingestion and inference. Activity and 

investment involving satellite communications is on the rise globally. Examples 

include the acquisition of a growing number of national satellite spectrum 

licences by Elon Musk’s Starlink; Saudi Arabia’s creation of the Neo Space 

Group; and the agreement between Airbus, Leonardo, and Thales to jointly create 

a leading European player in satellite and space systems manufacturing and 

services. The technology sovereignty agenda clearly plays a role in some of these 

initiatives, as territories look to secure their position and autonomy in the future 

satellite ecosystem.

Implications for capital, 
partnerships, and operating 
model

Playing in any or all four arenas has significant implications for telecoms in 
areas as varied as capex, ecosystem collaboration, and operating models. One 
important change is shifting capital allocation towards ‘AI-adjacent’ transport, 
targeting spending at domains with clearer pass-through to enterprise revenue; 

these include backhaul, DCI and metro fibre densification, coherent optics, and 

synchronisation upgrades. Another important change is building a tariff‑ready, 

sovereign supply chain, with dual‑sourced vendor stacks across domains like 
optics, routers, power, and cooling. PwC’s tariff guidance emphasises integrating 
customs, transfer pricing, and vendor selection into the same decision loop.

PwC18

Further enabling actions in securing a domestic mega‑scaler role include 

co‑investing at the edge. Where permitting and power are constraints 

for hyperscalers, telecoms can contribute sites, rights‑of‑way, and 

interconnects, while partners bring construction equity and long‑term offtake. 

Community‑integrated models can also unlock siting—at the same time 
strengthening the social licence to expand. 

Finally, telecoms should look to make speed a measurable advantage by tackling 

slow decision processes and risk aversion. One way to do this is by embedding 

a stage‑gate ‘time‑to‑light’ metric across build programmes and using portfolio 

rebalancing to kill or double down on initiatives quickly. Another way is for 
telecoms to adopt a ‘puretone’ approach by reconfiguring their business unit 
and functional structures to create clearer organising logic around their various 

and integrated business models. The defining feature of puretone business model 

archetypes is that they sharpen focus while enabling proximity to demand—two 

characteristics that align with both the telecom industry’s trajectory and the AI 

infrastructure cycle.

PwC04

19

Reinventing telecom 
business models

Capitalising on the AI infrastructure opportunity is one of several imperatives 

compelling telecoms to shift to a puretone model. Another is the performance 

and capital constraints mentioned earlier. A third is the benefits such a shift 

offers from a cost‑discipline perspective. The clarity and separation of puretone 

businesses forces greater P&L transparency and exposes areas where cost 

structures are not competitive—or perhaps are artificially distorted through 

internal cross‑charges, transfer prices, or internal subsidies. The effect is that the 

puretone approach provides a clear and honest open‑book view of the business’s 

economics and enables it to focus on realigning cost to optimal levels.

PwC’s Business Model Reinvention (BMR) Pressure Index shows current 
reinvention pressure at a level on par with that of the dot‑com era, driven by 
declining returns, technology shifts, and regulatory scrutiny. Across more than 
30 carriers we analysed, the operators progressing furthest on unbundling into 
puretone businesses and diversification commanded EV/EBITDA premiums 
of 30% to 50% over traditional integrated peers. Examples include Telstra’s 
2020 InfraCo separation and Jio Platforms’s ecosystem build in the same year, 
attracting more than $20 billion of strategic capital. 

PwC20

The market rewards reinvention

PwCTelecoms that reinvent their business models see higher multiples of revenue growth.Source: PwC analysis, Capital IQRe-frame (redeﬁne value proposition) Re-conﬁgure (reshapeoperating structure) Re-invent (create newrevenues)0×2×4×6×8×10×Typical integratedtelecom multiple90807060509585756555BMR maturity score0105-5Expected two-year revenue growth (%)Revenue growth expectations vs. BMR maturity scoreForward EV/EBITDA multiples for each BMR stage21

Reinvention is about choosing where to play and creating the right model with the 

right capital and operating autonomy. As the digital infrastructure cycle unfolds 

and telecoms seek ways to derive value from it, they should consider four main 

puretone archetypes:

Targeted InfraCo/NetCo: Put capital where proximity and wholesale 
demand are provable. The data centre (DC)/AI cycle will proceed with or 
without telecoms, and owning the inter‑ and intra‑DC connective fabric provides 

access to a contractable, growing wholesale value pool. The InfraCo/NetCo 

model directs infrastructure capital at open-access fibre, metro rings, dark fibre, 

and DCI. It can be financed via co-ownership to optimise capital costs while 

preserving service access for ServeCo and SolutionCo.

SolutionCo (enterprise and public sector): Prioritise outcomes over access. 
The enterprise buyer wants assured connectivity with security and observability. 

The SolutionCo model packages managed connectivity, SD-WAN/secure access 

service edge (SASE), zero-trust security, and life-cycle automation with clear 

SLAs and site-specific economics. It extends into private 5G/local area network, 

industrial Wi‑Fi, and edge computing to deliver latency‑sensitive outcomes in 

manufacturing, logistics, healthcare, and utilities. And where sovereignty matters, 

it brokers sovereign cloud and AI linked to compliant networks. 

ServeCo (direct-to-consumer): Defend ARPU, grow lifetime value. In a world 
of flat mobile ARPU, modest fixed-broadband uplift, and eroding speed-based 
differentiation, ServeCo wins by converging fibre and mobile and attaching digital 
services like premium wi-fi/mesh, security, entertainment, cloud storage, and 
home support. Fibre migrations boost ARPU, while bundles reduce churn. BMR 
Index evidence shows ServeCo patterns scaling via super-app-style aggregation 
and embedded finance in markets with wallet penetration. Examples include 
M-Pesa, MoMo, and STC Pay. 

PlatformCo/BrokerCo: Aggregate what customers already buy. Multi‑cloud 
and hybrid architectures increase complexity; buyers will pay to simplify sourcing, 

governance, and observability. This archetype acts as a neutral marketplace for 

the likes of wholesale broadband, cloud/edge, and security, curating multi‑vendor 

services under a single contract. Fast-growing segments include GPU-as-a-

PwC22

Service and global business services (GBS)-as-a-platform. Vodafone Intelligent 

Solutions and Orange/Deutsche Telekom’s BuyIn are among the telecoms 

externalising capabilities as a revenue line. 

How to build and operate the 
reinvented portfolio

Deals are the operating lever for reinventing to puretone models. Some 

examples? In fixed network separation, TIM sold its fixed NetCo to KKR in 2024. 

In portfolio rationalisation, Telefónica exited most of Latin America over the last 

several years, and Vodafone sold operations in Spain, Italy, and Hungary from 

2023 to 2025. And in tower monetisation, the TowerCo wave (Totem, Vantage, 

Telxius, GD Towers) of the 2020s reflects softwarised networks’ lower need to 

own sites. 

Once the reinvented puretone business has been created, operating it 

successfully requires three sets of interconnected attributes:

Autonomy with accountability. Our BMR Index diagnostics show that the 
strongest drivers of reinvention progress are accountable leadership and clarity in 

mission. These are design choices, not outcomes. 

Resilience and sovereignty. To navigate tariff and policy volatility, portfolios 
need supply chain and data/AI sovereignty options. SolutionCo can bundle 
sovereign-compliant workloads; InfraCo contracts should anticipate policy 
swings; PlatformCo’s brokerage can diversify vendor exposure. 

AI-native operations (‘TelcOS’). By embedding AI across their operations, 
telecoms can leverage the technology to simultaneously plan, run, and assure 
networks—in terms of predictive maintenance, dynamic spectrum, closed‑loop 
assurance—and compress cycle times in sales, care, and field operations. This 

model is central to ServeCo’s cost‑to‑serve, SolutionCo’s SLA delivery, and 

InfraCo’s energy and utilisation economics. We take a closer look at TelcOS in  

the next section.

PwC05

23

Shifting to AI‑native 
operations with ‘TelcOS’

The combination of modest revenue growth outlook and ongoing 

commoditisation is intensifying the pressure on telecoms’ differentiation, cash 

generation, and costs. Given that 35% of new passes in the US are now funded 

by private equity, incumbent carrier margins are under further pressure. And 
55% of the telecom CEOs in PwC’s 28th Global CEO Survey said they believed 
their company would no longer be economically viable a decade from now if it 

continued on its current path, compared with just 42% of all CEOs globally. 

The solution to these challenges lies in building AI‑native operations. Future‑

focused telecom executives aren’t treating AI as the final step in a transformation 

road map. Instead, they’re using AI agents today to simultaneously reduce costs, 

boost efficiency, improve customer and employee experiences, and modernise 

legacy systems. 

These strands of AI‑enabled reinvention combine into a model for the AI‑native 
telecom business that we’ve termed ‘TelcOS.’ It represents AI acting both as a 
demand driver—raising the bar for automation, assurance, and cost control—and 
as the means to manage and satisfy that demand. 

Adopting TelcOS offers major upgrades across a telecom company’s operations, 
including in areas such as network planning and design, network management 

and assurance, field and supply operations, customer operations, sales and 

product, and security and trust.

PwC24

The beneﬁts of TelcOS extend across the value chain

Business area or activity

Primary impacts

Network planning and design

Network management and assurance

Field and supply operations

Customer operations

Sales and products

Security and trust

With TelcOS, machine learning (ML) models optimise coverage/capacity, site 
placement, spectrum utilisation, and rollout sequencing—bringing beneﬁts 
including shorter time-to-service, lower build costs, and greener, more 
energy-efﬁcient designs.

Closed-loop assurance, anomaly detection, and causal AI tools reduce fault 
mean time to repair (MTTR), improve quality of experience, and reduce truck 
rolls by working across radio access network/transport/core, public cloud, 
and edge.

Reinforcement learning by AI helps telecoms optimise the supply of spares 
and route technicians more efﬁciently, while computer vision improves ﬁbre 
build quality assurance and agentic copilots generate method-of-procedure 
documents (MOPs) and log outcomes for audit.

Telecoms are already seeing signiﬁcant impacts from generative AI (GenAI) 
on service quality, with generative agents helping reduce handling time, 
resolve billing/service issues end-to-end, and personalise retention offers 
using churn propensity and margin logic.

GenAI accelerates individualised ‘segment-of-one’ offers and pre-populates 
enterprise solution designs, while generative agent triage can be used to 
lead and coauthor bids. AI can enable consumer product innovation as well 
(e.g. Deutsche Telekom’s AI phone).

AI augments cybersecurity detection and response; GenAI helps remediate 
misconﬁgurations and draft compliance artifacts—activities in which getting 
governance right is mission-critical, including formal LLMOps/MLOps and 
risk controls.

PwCSource: PwC analysis25

The data and platform 
foundations for TelcOS

The TelcOS operating model depends critically on putting the right data and 

platform underpinnings in place. A data-first approach using AI agents helps 

telecoms avoid two common missteps: (1) automating broken processes, and (2) 

waiting years for a clean slate on which to effect reinvention. Instead of relying 
on siloed applications and legacy databases, operators can now build a unified 

architecture that puts data and intelligence at the centre, over time replacing 

traditional tools like static billing platforms with AI agents that work across 

domains using shared context and standard models. This shift moves enterprise 

tech from simply recording what happened to detecting what’s happening across 

the enterprise and triggering the next best action in real time. 

Operators can lay the foundations for TelcOS reinvention by taking three steps:

Renew the data environment. A clean, modern digital core—anchored by 
an ERP backbone and unified data—lets both people and agents act safely, 

consistently, and at speed, thereby enabling end‑to‑end transformation. And 

most AI failures in telecom can be traced back to issues with data, such as silos, 

latency, lineage gaps, and quality debt. To avoid such problems, TelcOS needs 

the following:

•  Cloud-first data (lakehouse) with low-latency ingestion from OSS/BSS 
(operations and business support systems) and IT/OT (information and 
operational technology), unified identity resolution (subscriber, device, service, 
location), and governance-by-design.

•  A semantic data fabric over telemetry, orders, trouble tickets, inventory, 

topology, and finance—so agents can reason over meaning, not just columns.

•  Streaming/event backbones—such as Kafka or Pub/Sub—for real-time 

signals into planning, assurance, and customer experience loops.

The industry is already moving in this direction: in PwC’s cloud and AI business 
research, most tech/TMT companies reported GenAI adoption in “a few or 
many” operational areas—a precondition for scaling an AI data plane. 

PwC26

Move to microservices. Legacy stacks tend to fragment processes (assurance 
vs. care vs. billing). TelcOS favours domain microservices (catalogue, quote, 

order, inventory, policy, charging), exposing consistent APIs/events with common 

policy, identity, and ‘golden’ reference data. This removes handoffs, enabling 

closed‑loop automation with human‑in‑the‑loop governance. 

Orchestrate vendor-agnostic agentic workflows as a ‘human + agent’ 
enterprise. Discrete chatbots won’t move the P&L dial. Agentic operations 
require an ‘OS for agents’ that can enable cross‑vendor agents to collaborate 

with one another and with human teams on complex, cross-functional workflows 

behind secure gateways. This calls for new roles, new governance, and a 

model in which people and agents operate as a system, with a clear process for 

determining who does what. A practical way to organise and orchestrate this 
process is to use the TM Forum’s enhanced Telecom Operations Map (eTOM) 
model, which can help leaders decide where people should remain central, where 
agents can take the lead, and where seamless coordination between people 

and machines is required. TelcOS leaders are anchoring AI value to the P&L with 

‘autonomous value loops’ linked to a clear outcome metric, targeting high‑yield 

areas like network energy optimisation through cutting radio access network 

(RAN) power in low-load windows and zero-touch service assurance based on 

self‑healing incidents with guard rails. 

The bottom line? TelcOS is not a ‘nice to have.’ It is how carriers will protect 

margins, absorb AI-driven traffic growth, and create distinctive customer 
experiences in a market where ARPU growth lags inflation. The strategic 
question is no longer whether your telecoms will become AI-native; it’s how fast 

you can progress AI from pilots to a new operating system for the business. This 
is the direction of travel needed to secure the future of your business through 
2026 and beyond. The time to start is today. 

Subscribe to the Global Telecom Outlook for access to detailed additional data 
and commentary for fixed, mobile, capex, and IOT segments across 53 countries 

and territories.

PwC27

Author

Florian Gröne
Global Telecommunications Leader,  
PwC United States

The author would like to thank Jens Niebuhr, Russell Taylor, Maria Teresa Copabianco, 
Chase Bice, Lori Driscoll, and Mahmoud Makki for their contributions to this article.

PwCPerspectives from 
the Global Telecom 
Outlook, 2025–2029

pwc.com/gx/en/industries/tmt/telecom-outlook- 
perspectives.html

© 2026 PwC. All rights reserved. PwC refers to the PwC network and/or one or more of its member 
firms, each of which is a separate legal entity. Please see www.pwc.com/structure for further 
details.

