22/03/2026, 19:37

A Strong Option for Telcos in a Crowded B2B Market | BCG

We value your privacy

Please provide your consent for cookie usage on BCG.com. We

TECHNOLOGY, MEDIA, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS

use the following cookie types:

Essential Cookies are necessary for the site to function and are

In a Crowded B2B Market, the Middle Is a Strong
Option for Telcos

always active. These cookies also remember the choices you

make and provide a secure and enhanced experience.

Performance Cookies are used to provide a better user

By Maikel Wilms, Kyle Ruttan, Bartolomeo Banche, Luigi Vasi, and Arnaud Voguet

experience on the site, such as by measuring interactions with

ARTICLE  FEBRUARY 25, 2025  12 MIN READ

articles.

particular content so we can continue to offer you more relevant

Advertising or Targeting Cookies on our site don’t store any of

your direct personal information but identify a unique browser or

device, and are used to potentially surface relevant material from

other sites, and are primarily used by select social media and

other partners.

ACCEPT ALL AND CLOSE

ESSENTIAL COOKIES ONLY

VIEW DETAILS

PRIVACY POLICY

https://www.bcg.com/publications/2025/a-strong-option-for-telcos-in-a-crowded-b2b-market

1/10

 
22/03/2026, 19:37

A Strong Option for Telcos in a Crowded B2B Market | BCG

If telcos want to improve their proﬁtability and become more resilient, they need to expand their
information and communications technology (ICT) businesses. In an increasingly crowded B2B market,
they must move into margin-accretive areas beyond basic connectivity. But telcos are in danger of being
shut out of these fast-growing areas by newer players, such as hyperscalers and managed service
providers (MSPs). Those players are piggybacking on telcos’ existing infrastructure and providing cloud
migration and Internet of Things (IoT) services or selling customers artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) and data
analytics solutions.

TECHNOLOGY, MEDIA, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS

In a Crowded B2B Market, the Middle Is a Strong
Option for Telcos

To compete, telcos need to focus on market segments that allow them to play to their strengths,
including their strong relationships and local presence. While it is not the only segment that oﬀers
potential, we believe the middle market (made up of customers that employ a few hundred people)
represents a particularly attractive opportunity for telcos for this very reason.
By Maikel Wilms, Kyle Ruttan, Bartolomeo Banche, Luigi Vasi, and Arnaud Voguet

ARTICLE  FEBRUARY 25, 2025  12 MIN READ

To compete, telcos need to focus on market segments that allow them to play to their
strengths, including their strong relationships and local presence.

The Growing Complexity of Customer
Needs

Demand for ICT solutions is growing rapidly. Combined revenues in the US and Europe are expected to
expand at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 8% and 11%, respectively, between 2024 and
2028. The strong market is being driven by customers’ ever more sophisticated IT requirements as they
seek to transform their operations to reduce costs and boost productivity. Three areas in particular are
beneﬁting:

AI. Companies are leveraging AI technologies to automate processes, optimize workﬂows, and enhance
customer experiences.

Cybersecurity. With the number of annual cyberattacks worldwide more than doubling since the start
of the COVID-19 pandemic, cybersecurity has become a top priority. Organizations require robust,
scalable soware solutions to protect their operations and data.

Cloud migration. Cloud services is the fastest-growing ICT area due to companies’ need for specialized
support to ensure that their cloud migrations are seamless and low risk. The European market is
growing at a CAGR of approximately 18%, with the US market expanding at around 14%. Many

https://www.bcg.com/publications/2025/a-strong-option-for-telcos-in-a-crowded-b2b-market

2/10

22/03/2026, 19:37

A Strong Option for Telcos in a Crowded B2B Market | BCG

companies in more complex and risk-sensitive sectors, such as banking and ﬁnance, have yet to fully
migrate their operations to the cloud due to concerns over business disruptions and migration
diﬃculties.

TECHNOLOGY, MEDIA, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS

The outlook for connectivity—which is an essential enabler for many ICT solutions—is not so
reassuring. Revenues in the US and Europe are expected to increase by a CAGR of just 2.5% between
2024 and 2028. The reason: companies are prepared to pay for advanced ICT solutions that help them
achieve their transformation goals. But to meet the cost of those solutions, ﬁrms are pushing for price
cuts in internet connectivity, which is rapidly becoming a commodity product.

In a Crowded B2B Market, the Middle Is a Strong
Option for Telcos

WEEKLY INSIGHTS SUBSCRIPTION

By Maikel Wilms, Kyle Ruttan, Bartolomeo Banche, Luigi Vasi, and Arnaud Voguet

ARTICLE  FEBRUARY 25, 2025  12 MIN READ

Stay ahead with BCG insights on technology,
media, and telecommunications

Enter Email

A Crowded Market

This is bad news for traditional telcos. By focusing on providing connectivity services to customers
through their existing networks, these players are particularly exposed to the downside of market shis.
In recent years, some savvy telcos have expanded their ICT oﬀerings by targeting particular market
segments and transforming their capabilities. (See the sidebar “What Savvy Telcos Can Teach Others.”)
But even those companies are facing stiﬀ competition from three distinct types of challengers that have
emerged since the turn of the decade:

Hyperscalers. Major cloud service providers, such as Amazon Web Services (AWS), Microso Azure, and
Google Cloud, are aggressively expanding their oﬀerings, particularly in AI and cloud infrastructure
services. They are selling solutions tailored to speciﬁc sectors, such as health care, ﬁnance, and
manufacturing. AWS, for example, oﬀers bespoke, integrated cloud solutions through its marketplace,
enabling buyers to download soware-as-a-service products over the internet. It is also opening
localized cloud regions to address regional needs and regulatory requirements.

System Integrators (SIs) and MSPs. Global and regional SIs and MSPs, which integrate customers’
existing IT systems with new ones, are positioning themselves as key participants in digital

https://www.bcg.com/publications/2025/a-strong-option-for-telcos-in-a-crowded-b2b-market

3/10

22/03/2026, 19:37

A Strong Option for Telcos in a Crowded B2B Market | BCG

transformations and capturing market share. There are approximately 20 to 30 global players selling
customized IT solutions to the world’s top 2,000 companies. To expand their product oﬀerings, players
are partnering with or acquiring other players that have complementary capabilities. HCL Technologies,
a global IT consultancy based in India, has partnered with US soware developer ServiceNow to provide
generative AI (GenAI)-powered transformation solutions. Similarly, global IT consultancy Accenture’s
recent acquisition of US MSP Navisite has bolstered its portfolio of cloud-based services. Regional SIs
and MSPs, meanwhile, are focusing on mid-size companies and providing comprehensive IT and cloud
migration services that cater to local requirements.

TECHNOLOGY, MEDIA, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS

In a Crowded B2B Market, the Middle Is a Strong
Option for Telcos

Value-Added Resellers (VARs). VARs are low-margin players that resell hardware and soware solutions
to business customers. The VAR market is highly fragmented, especially in the US. There are more than
2,000 VARs competing for customers in the US mid-market and small business segments. However,
VARs are losing market share to regional MSPs that are aggressively targeting these segments. As a
By Maikel Wilms, Kyle Ruttan, Bartolomeo Banche, Luigi Vasi, and Arnaud Voguet
result, VARs’ share of mid-market and small business clients is expected to drop from 35% in 2022 to
25% by 2028. To remain competitive, VARs are expanding their cloud products and cloud migration
ARTICLE  FEBRUARY 25, 2025  12 MIN READ
services for these companies.

What Savvy Telcos Can Teach Others

Some telcos are getting ahead of the game by making shrewd strategic moves to help them
succeed in the B2B information and communications technology (ICT) market. Here are some
of the lessons that other telcos can take from them:

Choose your primary market segments. While telcos can serve several segments, they should
prioritize one or two—and, in our opinion, focus especially on the mid-market—so that they
can tailor their approach, meet speciﬁc customer requirements, and maximize their market
impact.

Focus on margins. To maintain proﬁtability, telcos must transition from providing just basic
connectivity to oﬀering newer, higher-value products, such as managed IT solutions and cloud
services. These newer ICT areas generate gross margins of 25% to 35% for telcos—compared
with margins of 5% to 10% with reselling—and oﬀer them a more sustainable revenue model.

Become ecosystem orchestrators. Telcos must redeﬁne their role and shi from being pure
infrastructure providers to orchestrators of the complex and evolving ICT ecosystems of their
corporate clients. This change will enable them to oﬀer more integrated solutions—involving
their own and others’ products—that cater to businesses’ increasingly interconnected needs.

Engage with customers earlier. Telcos should adjust their go-to-market strategies so that they
engage with trusted clients earlier. Doing so can help them ensure that their ICT solutions
meet customer demands most eﬀectively. It also allows them to capture revenue faster.
Proactive engagement helps build stronger, more responsive client relationships.

Transform capabilities. To stay competitive in a crowded ICT market, telcos must transform
their sales, tech delivery, and service capabilities. To gain competencies in key emerging areas,

https://www.bcg.com/publications/2025/a-strong-option-for-telcos-in-a-crowded-b2b-market

4/10

22/03/2026, 19:37

A Strong Option for Telcos in a Crowded B2B Market | BCG

they will likely need to form partnerships with other players and pursue targeted acquisitions.

Incubate separate business units. By establishing independent business units, telcos can
scale more quickly and respond to market changes with greater agility. Spinouts can also help
telcos channel resources and expertise into ICT growth opportunities.

TECHNOLOGY, MEDIA, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS

In a Crowded B2B Market, the Middle Is a Strong
Option for Telcos

Until now, telcos have played a crucial role in providing connectivity and basic IT solutions, including
reselling communication services such as Zoom and Microso Teams, because of their network
expertise. By contrast, MSPs, SIs, and VARs have taken the lead in supplying enterprise soware, data
By Maikel Wilms, Kyle Ruttan, Bartolomeo Banche, Luigi Vasi, and Arnaud Voguet
analytics, and integration services.

However, the lines between players are blurring: hyperscalers are starting to bundle internet
ARTICLE  FEBRUARY 25, 2025  12 MIN READ
connectivity with their cloud oﬀerings, while some telcos are expanding into soware development
either through partnerships with IT companies or by creating their own development departments. This
convergence is a clear sign that telcos must diversify their ICT capabilities beyond connectivity or risk
being le behind by more ambitious players.

Telcos must diversify their ICT capabilities beyond connectivity or risk being le behind by
more ambitious players.

The Mid-Market Opportunity

Several forces, meanwhile, are reshaping the global market environment in ICT. Data privacy and
localization regulations are creating new region-speciﬁc compliance requirements for companies.
Growing geopolitical tensions are causing countries to favor local players to safeguard their critical
systems. And organizations are demanding faster, more reliable IT services, beneﬁting players with local
infrastructure.

These forces are causing all ICT players to become more localized, through regional data centers, local
partnerships, and tailored services. Telcos still have an edge over competitors, thanks to their
widespread and established infrastructure networks, their familiarity with navigating complex local
rules, and their deep-rooted relationships with local enterprises and governments. But they need to
double down on their strengths and develop new capabilities to win.

https://www.bcg.com/publications/2025/a-strong-option-for-telcos-in-a-crowded-b2b-market

5/10

22/03/2026, 19:37

A Strong Option for Telcos in a Crowded B2B Market | BCG

Targeting a speciﬁc market segment can help them do this. There are four market segments for ICT
services and solutions that telcos can choose from. While all four oﬀer opportunities, we believe that
the middle market is the most attractive, since customers in this segment place particular value on
relationships with local players.

TECHNOLOGY, MEDIA, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Large Enterprises and Multinational Corporations. This segment was worth an estimated $415 billion
in the US and an estimated $550 billion in Europe in 2024. Because these companies require
comprehensive digital transformation projects, hyperscalers and global system integrators are better
positioned to meet their needs than are telcos. However, telcos can still play a pivotal role in providing
connectivity and cybersecurity services.

In a Crowded B2B Market, the Middle Is a Strong
Option for Telcos

Public Sector. Telcos may be able to gain an edge over hyperscalers and system integrators in this
segment by leveraging their local expertise. Their ability to navigate complex regulatory environments
and deliver localized infrastructure makes them well suited to meet public sector needs.
By Maikel Wilms, Kyle Ruttan, Bartolomeo Banche, Luigi Vasi, and Arnaud Voguet

Mid-Market. This segment was worth an estimated $245 billion in the US and an estimated $150
ARTICLE  FEBRUARY 25, 2025  12 MIN READ
billion in Europe in 2024 and is projected to grow at a CAGR of 8% and 9%, respectively, between 2024
and 2028. Some 76% of mid-market companies in the US and Europe prefer to purchase IT services
from their existing ICT providers, creating a clear opportunity for telcos to expand beyond connectivity
into selling mid-market customers more advanced solutions.

Small Oﬃce/Home Oﬃce and Small Businesses. This segment was worth an estimated $280 billion in
the US and an estimated $145 billion in Europe in 2024. These businesses value simplicity and cost-
eﬀective ICT products. That means telcos have an opportunity to provide tailored, localized solutions
and oﬀer bundled services that integrate connectivity, security, and essential business tools.

Three Mid-Market Roles for Telcos

Before they enter the mid-market segment, telcos must select their strategy with care. The approach
they choose will have signiﬁcant implications for future costs, capabilities, and market positioning. We
have identiﬁed three potential roles, each of which oﬀers clear advantages and trade-oﬀs: companies
can become a connectivity provider, a core ICT services provider, or a full vertical-solutions provider.

Option 1: Connectivity Provider. By proactively partnering with MSPs, SIs, and VARs, telcos can oﬀer
business customers their connectivity services while other ICT players manage more complex solutions.
Because this strategy leverages telcos’ existing infrastructure, it carries minimal risk and requires little
new investment.

This option is particularly suitable for telcos that operate in markets where basic connectivity is still in
demand, either due to geographical or technological considerations or where industry demand for IoT
and smart infrastructure is growing. Telcos must also have an established network and strong
partnerships with other ICT players so they can support the delivery of a range of services.

Telcos that adopt a connectivity provider model typically enjoy earnings before interest, taxes,
depreciation, and amortization (EBITDA) margins of approximately 30% to 50%. However, as

https://www.bcg.com/publications/2025/a-strong-option-for-telcos-in-a-crowded-b2b-market

6/10

22/03/2026, 19:37

A Strong Option for Telcos in a Crowded B2B Market | BCG

connectivity becomes an increasingly commoditized product, it may be diﬃcult to maintain these high
margins without signiﬁcant streamlining and cost-reduction initiatives. Telcos also risk being perceived
as low-value commodity players, with their partners seen as owning customer relationships and
providing high-value services. Over time, these factors can limit telcos’ growth and result in low
proﬁtability.

TECHNOLOGY, MEDIA, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS

Option 2: Core ICT Services Provider. Telcos can leverage their existing strengths in connectivity and
security by oﬀering mid-market businesses standardized ICT solutions in essential areas such as
network management, cybersecurity, and cloud support. This strategy allows telcos to capture greater
value across the tech stack without having to make substantial investments.

In a Crowded B2B Market, the Middle Is a Strong
Option for Telcos

We consider this option the best one for telcos that are seeking to expand in the mid-market segment.
Mid-market businesses want cost-eﬀective, scalable solutions and automation technologies—which
telcos are well-placed to provide. This option also helps telcos achieve an optimum risk-reward balance,
By Maikel Wilms, Kyle Ruttan, Bartolomeo Banche, Luigi Vasi, and Arnaud Voguet
as it allows them to drive growth by managing costs eﬀectively and expanding their oﬀerings to
customers through deeper relationships.
ARTICLE  FEBRUARY 25, 2025  12 MIN READ

While there are signiﬁcant competitive pressures with this role, the operational eﬃciencies that telcos
achieve through automating and standardizing their products and internal processes can help them
sustain these margins. Nevertheless, the price sensitivity of mid-market business customers means
telcos’ proﬁtability is likely to be modest compared with strategic approaches that involve more value-
added services or higher-paying customers.

Mid-market businesses want cost-eﬀective, scalable solutions and automation technologies
—which telcos are well-placed to provide.

To succeed with this strategy, telcos will need to make changes in these aspects of their businesses:

Their Go-to-Market Strategy. Telcos should bolster the sales team’s skills so that members can
identify the ICT requirements of mid-market businesses and oﬀer appropriate solutions. They
should also train sales employees to communicate eﬀectively with business customers about IT
services, not just connectivity, and adjust incentive structures to reward sales of service-based
products.

Their Product Oﬀerings. Firms should develop standardized, pre-conﬁgured solutions that address
the core needs of mid-market business customers. These oﬀerings should give businesses the
opportunity to outsource their IT requirements by including connectivity, cybersecurity, and
managed services.

Cost Eﬃciency. They should improve cost optimization by standardizing oﬀerings and leveraging
automation technologies, such as GenAI, to lower service desk costs. As well as curbing costs,

https://www.bcg.com/publications/2025/a-strong-option-for-telcos-in-a-crowded-b2b-market

7/10

22/03/2026, 19:37

A Strong Option for Telcos in a Crowded B2B Market | BCG

simplifying deployment processes can also help maintain the price competitiveness and scalability
of telcos’ product oﬀerings.

Option 3: Full Vertical-Solutions Provider. To help them prosper in a crowded marketplace, telcos can
build a diﬀerentiated ICT oﬀering by providing solutions that are tailored to the needs of diﬀerent
sectors such as health care, manufacturing, and transportation. This option is best suited to markets
where sectors are undergoing a rapid digital transformation but must still adhere to strict regulatory
requirements.

TECHNOLOGY, MEDIA, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS

In a Crowded B2B Market, the Middle Is a Strong
Option for Telcos

In addition to giving telcos the opportunity to create a strong foothold in speciﬁc vertical markets, this
approach can deliver EBITDA margins of up to 35%. Targeted margins are relatively low to start with
because telcos must make signiﬁcant upfront investments to diversify their service oﬀerings and
develop new technologies. However, by becoming full vertical-solution providers, telcos can capture a
By Maikel Wilms, Kyle Ruttan, Bartolomeo Banche, Luigi Vasi, and Arnaud Voguet
bigger share of the ICT value chain as they sell more value-added services, such as cybersecurity and
cloud computing.
ARTICLE  FEBRUARY 25, 2025  12 MIN READ

To succeed, telcos must develop a deep understanding of their target sectors—including ICT use cases,
regulatory challenges, and compliance requirements—and design solutions that meet the precise
needs of each one. Telcos will also need to equip their sales teams with sector-speciﬁc knowledge so
that they can communicate the beneﬁts of their oﬀerings, align sales incentive models with new market
penetration goals, and create credentials that foster customer trust in individual sectors.

Focusing on the mid-market segment represents a signiﬁcant strategic move for telcos. As they chart a
course to expand their ICT oﬀerings, players can use their knowledge of local regulations and data rules
to diﬀerentiate themselves from the competition. But depending on which role they select, they will
need to develop standardized, scalable solutions; retrain their sales teams and introduce new incentive
arrangements; utilize automation and AI to streamline operations and reduce costs; and consider
providing more sector-speciﬁc, value-added products. The payoﬀ for those that take the steps needed for
mid-market growth will be a brighter and more resilient future.

Authors

Maikel Wilms

Partner & Director, Communications
Amsterdam

https://www.bcg.com/publications/2025/a-strong-option-for-telcos-in-a-crowded-b2b-market

8/10

22/03/2026, 19:37

A Strong Option for Telcos in a Crowded B2B Market | BCG

Kyle Ruttan

Managing Director & Partner
Toronto

TECHNOLOGY, MEDIA, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS

In a Crowded B2B Market, the Middle Is a Strong
Option for Telcos

Bartolomeo Banche

Managing Director & Senior Partner
Milan

By Maikel Wilms, Kyle Ruttan, Bartolomeo Banche, Luigi Vasi, and Arnaud Voguet

ARTICLE  FEBRUARY 25, 2025  12 MIN READ

Luigi Vasi

Principal
Milan

Arnaud Voguet

Knowledge Senior Director – Telecommunications
Paris

Related Content

https://www.bcg.com/publications/2025/a-strong-option-for-telcos-in-a-crowded-b2b-market

9/10

22/03/2026, 19:37

A Strong Option for Telcos in a Crowded B2B Market | BCG

TECHNOLOGY, MEDIA, AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS

In a Crowded B2B Market, the Middle Is a Strong
Option for Telcos

By Maikel Wilms, Kyle Ruttan, Bartolomeo Banche, Luigi Vasi, and Arnaud Voguet

ABOUT BOSTON CONSULTING GROUP
Boston Consulting Group partners with leaders in business and society to tackle their most important
ARTICLE  FEBRUARY 25, 2025  12 MIN READ
challenges and capture their greatest opportunities. BCG was the pioneer in business strategy when it
was founded in 1963. Today, we work closely with clients to embrace a transformational approach aimed
at beneﬁting all stakeholders—empowering organizations to grow, build sustainable competitive
advantage, and drive positive societal impact.
Our diverse, global teams bring deep industry and functional expertise and a range of perspectives that
question the status quo and spark change. BCG delivers solutions through leading-edge management
consulting, technology and design, and corporate and digital ventures. We work in a uniquely
collaborative model across the ﬁrm and throughout all levels of the client organization, fueled by the goal
of helping our clients thrive and enabling them to make the world a better place.
© Boston Consulting Group 2026. All rights reserved.
For information or permission to reprint, please contact BCG at permissions@bcg.com. To ﬁnd the latest
BCG content and register to receive e-alerts on this topic or others, please visit bcg.com. Follow Boston
Consulting Group on Facebook and X (formerly Twitter).

Unlocking the Potential of Those Who Advance the World

Careers

Alumni

Oﬃces

Subscribe

About

How can we assist you?

We value the opportunity to connect with you. Please submit your inquiries and feedback, and our experienced
professionals are ready to assist you.

CONTACT US

EN |

JA

https://www.bcg.com/publications/2025/a-strong-option-for-telcos-in-a-crowded-b2b-market

10/10

ARTICLEFEBRUARY 22, 2018Telecommunications: Breaking Through the BottlenecksDigital transformation is hard, particularly for telcos. The leaders are looking beyond their coreandusingtheirstrengthstomeetthechallenges