Technology, Media & Telecommunications Practice

The growing imperative  
of energy optimization for  
telco networks 

Rising energy costs, growing consumption, and the need to meet 
decarbonization goals are pressuring telcos to lower costs and to 
use electricity more efficiently.

by Javier Gil Gomez, Aleksander Matlok, Tiago Silveira, and Lieven Verboven

February  2024

© Getty Images

Recent energy price hikes have hit the 
telecommunications sector hard, compounding 
the increased energy use involved with building 
out networks, traffic growth, and the ongoing 
transition away from legacy technologies. Energy 
spending was already a significant cost factor for 
telecom operators, at up to 5 percent of revenue, 
before recent price hikes. In the last few years, 
though, large operators have seen their energy 
cost increases outpace sales growth by more 
than 50 percent. Yet even as they set ambitious 
decarbonization targets, operators’ responses to 
rising energy-related costs have been muted so 
far, constrained by operational and organizational 
limitations. 

It is possible, though, to achieve significant savings 
on energy, by combining analytics, procurement, 
and technology shifts with the right vision, strategy, 
and organizational approach. Our research shows 
that companies can achieve 15 to 30 percent 
savings in energy cost by using a holistic approach 
that combines technology solutions with site and 
equipment optimization, pricing, and operational 
levers to create substantial and sustainable change. 

In this article, we assess the causes of energy 
cost increases and how operators are coping with 
them, and we offer a potential path forward through 
better site design, a shift toward energy-efficient 
technologies, analytics-based optimizations, and 
the implementation of pricing levers. 

Sources of pressure
Geopolitical pressure and increased demand are 
expected to keep electricity prices high in most 
markets in the near term. According to the World 
Bank, for example, energy commodity prices are 
not expected to fall below pre-2022 levels in the 
coming year. For telecom operators, the problem 
is compounded by the expected growth in mobile 
traffic, which is forecast at more than 20 percent 
per year until 2030. This forces them to pay more for 
electricity and use more of it. 

Together, mobile- and fixed-network consumption 
already account for more than 75 percent of 

telcos’ total energy consumption. Additional, 
exponential growth in data consumption over the 
next five years will likely offset the benefits of more 
energy-efficient data transmission protocols. In 
addition, site densification to support new wireless 
technologies such as 5G (and eventually 6G) will 
further increase telcos’ total energy consumption. 
And although fiber rollout is progressing, operators 
must still support multiple, less-energy-efficient 
legacy systems until all customers have migrated to 
the newer infrastructure. 

At the same time, telcos are also making 
commitments to carbon neutrality that will require 
them to optimize their energy consumption. The 
industry as a whole has pledged to reach net zero 
by 2050 at the latest, and the most ambitious 
operators are striving to do it as early as 2025. 
Tackling the carbon footprint associated with 
network operation will be critical to reaching those 
targets, given that networks account for the largest 
part of telcos’ Scope 1 & 2 emissions and more than 
25 percent of their average total greenhouse-gas 
output.

It isn’t only the telcos themselves that are applying 
pressure to advance decarbonization efforts. The 
sector is estimated to be responsible for up to 2 
percent of global carbon emissions, so its efforts 
are likely to be both scrutinized and incentivized 
by sustainability-focused consumers and climate 
impact funds led by activist investors. Pressure is 
likely also to come from regulators around the world, 
as they begin to adopt their own decarbonization 
goals and factor sustainability considerations into 
their policies. 

State of the industry 
To bolster our understanding of this challenge, we 
surveyed telecommunications leaders around 
the world regarding their concerns about energy 
management, the outlook or the future, and how 
they plan to tackle the obstacles that lie ahead.¹  
Their focus on the energy issue is growing, with 
67 percent of respondents stating they have 
significantly accelerated cost-optimization efforts 
over the past two years. They cited a variety 

1  Our survey was fielded in the first half of 2023 and included 30 chief technology, procurement, and sustainability officers from 
telecommunications companies around the world.

2

The growing imperative of energy optimization for telco networks 

of worries about energy issues, chief among 
them economic volatility, geopolitical instability, 
and energy pricing volatility (Exhibit 1). They 
acknowledge the challenge will not be resolved 
by external factors alone, with only 27 percent of 
respondents saying they expect prices to decrease. 
However, those surveyed indicated that their 
ability to mitigate energy risk and optimize costs is 
hampered by operational and organizational deficits.

Operational considerations: Most telcos today 
are managing a geographically dispersed network, 
often with thousands or tens of thousands of 
sites, a variety of technology configurations, and 
limited capabilities for remote management. This 
complexity, combined with still-nascent smart-
network management, presents another challenge: 
53 percent of our survey respondents said their use 
of real-time energy monitoring tools, such as smart 

meters or DC probes, was limited or nonexistent, 
and many operators indicated they lack granularity 
in their measurements, with only 33 percent 
tracking energy KPIs at the individual site level. 

These deficits further limit operators’ ability to 
implement more strategic and analytics-driven 
energy cost-and-consumption reduction levers 
such as digital twins² and self-optimizing networks. 
Indeed, when asked which advanced tools are 
most important to reducing energy costs, only 20 
percent of our survey respondents said they have 
used self-optimizing networks in the last three 
years, and only 3 percent said they use digital 
twins, the lowest figure for any cost lever. And 
while most operators surveyed said they use radio 
access network (RAN) equipment power-saving 
features, 37 percent said they do so without 
monitoring impact or optimizing parameters. 

2 A digital twin is a digital representation of a physical object, person, or process, contextualized in a digital version of its environment. See “What is 
digital twin technology?” McKinsey, July 12, 2023. 

Web <2024>
<Network-energy-optimization>
Exhibit <1> of <3>
Exhibit 1 
Unfavorable price dynamics drive telco executives’ concerns about
Unfavorable price dynamics drive telco executives’ concerns about energy costs.
energy costs.

Top sources of concern,¹
% of respondents

Issue outlook, % of respondents who
say issue “will become more concerning”

Inflation

Volatile energy prices

Labor shortage

Increased economic volatility

Supply chain disruptions

Rising interest rates

Geopolitical instability

Domestic political conflict

Changes in trade policy

20

20

87

77

73

70

63

63

60

53

60

50

50

60

57

40

77

77

COVID-19 pandemic

3

0

Changes in network energy prices observed and future expectations,¹ % of respondents

Slight decrease (0–15%)

Remain unchanged

Slight increase (0–15%)

Significant increase (>15%)

Last 3 years

3 3

37

57

Next 3 years

27

10

37

26

1Our survey was fielded in the first half of 2023 with 30 chief technology, procurement, and sustainability officers from telecommunications companies around 
the world.
Source: McKinsey analysis

McKinsey & Company

The growing imperative of energy optimization for telco networks 

3

Operators’ focus remains mostly on tactical and 
incremental consumption reduction and on pricing 
and procurement levers. Here, too, current efforts 
have room for improvement. While most of the 
operators surveyed plan to build new sites to high 
standards of energy-efficiency, only a third plan 
to upgrade their existing brownfield footprint, 
and while 93 percent have carried out passive 
equipment updates, such as rectifiers or modern 
power cables and air conditioning systems, most 
have done so only on a small scale. Finally, only 
33 percent of respondents said they source most 
of their energy consumption via wholesale power 
purchase agreements (PPA)s, meaning that two-
thirds are still exclusively paying dynamic, market-
rate fees for their electricity or using PPAs in only a 
limited fashion.

Organizational considerations: Even though most 
telcos understand these challenges, their ability 
to address them remains limited by organizational 
considerations, such as inadequate governance. 
Of our survey respondents, 40 percent said they 
spread energy-related strategy and decision 
making across multiple departments (Exhibit 2). 
As a consequence, 20 percent said their energy 
initiatives are relatively uncoordinated, and another 

37 percent said their energy operations have weak 
accountability and incentive systems. The lack of 
clarity in accountability allows for slippage in day-
to-day energy-related operations. Additionally, 
the nature of the optimization initiatives in this 
field requires buy-in from various parts of the 
organization, which puts the initiatives at a 
disadvantage from the start, increasing their 
complexity, limiting their scope, and diminishing 
their impact as a result. 

The opportunity at hand
To tap into the next level of energy savings, 
operators have four main tools at their disposal: 
zero-based design of mobile network sites, 
optimizing energy use with analytics, strategic 
innovation in the pricing and sourcing of energy, 
and decommissioning legacy fixed networks 
(Exhibit 3). Crucially, a considerable portion of 
the potential can be achieved without significant 
investments or major strategic changes, and the 
results can be quantified within a few weeks of 
implementation.

Zero-based design of mobile networks: The 
energy consumption of mobile networks is strongly 

Exhibit 2 
Responsibility for energy operations is often dispersed among decision
Responsibility for energy operations is often dispersed among decision 
makers, impeding cost-saving action.
makers, impeding cost-saving action. 

Number of departments involved 
in driving strategy and decisions 
related to energy,¹ % of respondents

Department within organization that drives strategy 
and decision making related to energy,
% of respondents

Multiple
decision-making
departments

Single
decision-making
department

40

60

Energy operations in
scope of responsibility

Out of scope of
responsibility / no position

Chief technical
officer’s department

Chief procurement
officer’s department

30

Chief financial
officer’s department

20

Chief sustainability
officer’s department

30

77

23

70

80

70

Other

3

97

1Our survey was fielded in the first half of 2023 with 30 chief technology, procurement, and sustainability officers from telecommunications companies around 
the world.
Source: McKinsey analysis

McKinsey & Company

The growing imperative of energy optimization for telco networks 

4

Exhibit 3 
A rapid assessment model can help estimate the savings potential of
A rapid assessment model can help estimate the savings potential of 
AI-enabled network energy optimization.
AI-enabled network energy optimization.

Category

Lever

Site
design
optimization

Zero-based site design to ensure maximum 
efficiency

Resource pooling

Active and passive equipment upgrades
to improve energy efficiency

Analytics-
enabled
optimization

Digital-twin development to monitor network 
performance

SON² solutions to dynamically manage network 
parameters (eg, user-experience-driven
optimization, carrier shutdowns) 

Strategic
energy
sourcing

Renewable energy sources as a lower-cost 
supply alternative

New commercial agreements on energy
sourcing

Typical time to
impact, months

Typical impact on energy
operating expense,¹ %

12+

4–6

4–6

6

5–10

5–10

5–15

5–8

6–9

2–6

4–6

5–10

Active
service
rationalization

OEM energy management features activation

4

Migration of legacy systems

6–9

3–5

3–8

Total: 15–30%

1Savings from energy consumption overlap, for example RAN resource pooling has greater potential where equipment has not been upgraded, so the upper 
bounds of savings potential cannot be taken cumulatively.
2Self-optimizing network.
Source: McKinsey analysis

McKinsey & Company

influenced by the design and layout of each mobile 
site. Previously, network evolution focused on 
equipment upgrades, not improved site design. As 
a result, operators invested in energy-efficient 
cabinets on new sites, but the opportunity to 
optimize energy consumption at legacy sites was 
left on the table. Tapping into this potential requires 
a detailed understanding of the drivers of energy 
consumption at current sites through a structured 
approach that correlates consumption with 
specific legacy-site design features and includes 
detailed site walkthroughs to identify overlooked 
opportunities for lowering costs. 

Optimizing cooling equipment is the first step, 
which often involves recalibrating power to match 

equipment needs, partitioning shelter space, 
improving insulation, and enhancing temperature 
specifications and remote controls. Depending on 
the region, another tactic might be reducing the 
need for mechanical refrigeration by using naturally 
cool air or water. Other substantial savings can be 
made in site-level consumption through targeted 
investment in high-efficiency, active equipment 
such as baseband units (BBU) and radio, rectifiers, 
and power cables. 

Finally, more far-reaching network design 
optimization can be done through a shift to a 
centralized RAN architecture, in which multiple sites 
share network functions located in a “BBU hotel” 
to achieve benefits of scale and network sharing. 

The growing imperative of energy optimization for telco networks 

5

However, switching to centralized RAN and network 
sharing would be a significant, strategic and capital-
intensive change and therefore unlikely to be driven 
solely by energy-optimization considerations. 
Nevertheless, these initiatives hold substantial 
potential to curb energy consumption and they 
should be considered as part of a holistic network 
cost transformation. 

Analytics-driven optimization of energy: While 
operators have tended to use meters to estimate the 
active consumption of 4G and 5G equipment, they 
typically have had limited ability to forecast “normal” 
consumption for legacy technologies, transmission, 
and passive equipment. The use of on-site 
measurement devices like AC and DC probes is 
expensive, and therefore also limited. Leading telcos 
use digital twins and analytical models to forecast 
energy consumption more accurately at individual 
sites, identify deviations, and define action plans.

Highly detailed correlations of energy consumption 
with other metrics  (network traffic and quality of 
service, perhaps) for specific sites or for elements 
of network infrastructure  can facilitate real-
time decision making. Radio features might be 
dynamically activated based on site-level thresholds  
or network load at specific times of day or different 
seasons, for example, allowing operators to optimize 
their network where and when it matters most, 
enhancing customer experience. 

In addition to real-time action, data analytics also 
enables more long-term and structural strategic 
decision making on energy consumption. By 
assigning values such as direct average revenue 
per user (ARPU), customer experience scores, 
and churn estimates to individual sites or network 
elements, operators can develop a “return per 
kWh” metric for different parts of their network 
infrastructure. This allows them to further adjust 
network operating conditions, such as radio 
shutdowns, to minimize energy consumption without 
impacting actual customer experience.

Pricing and sourcing: The many operators that 
still do not exclusively or primarily use wholesale 
power purchasing agreements and hedging options 

are missing a valuable opportunity to decrease 
and derisk energy costs, as well as access green 
energy without incurring capital expenses.³ In 
much of Europe, for example, choosing a ten-
year purchasing agreement over baseload year-
ahead prices can save between 5 and 20 percent. 
Telecom operators can make particularly good 
utility partners in green-energy agreements, 
given that telco network consumption correlates 
with peak daylight hours, eliminating the need 
to store wind- or solar-generated electricity in 
batteries. Another option is virtual (or financial) 
power purchasing agreements. These financial 
instruments don’t involve the physical delivery of 
energy but can be a way to indirectly access green 
energy in regions that lack actual green-energy 
generation while helping new providers get their 
businesses off the ground. Ideally, a telco would 
precisely project its energy demand and select a 
combination of power purchasing agreements and 
green on-site solar generation capacity that offers 
dynamic volume and closely matches its energy 
consumption, both over time and in different 
geographies. This approach maximizes the 
deployment of renewable energy and minimizes 
price risk. For example, a telco with significant 
access to solar power might choose to increase 
its usage at the times of day when overall power 
usage is highest and traditional energy sources 
are charging peak rates. 

Telcos are also well positioned to generate 
their own electricity, an option that can improve 
operational agility on energy sourcing and provide 
a new—if small—line of income. Solar-generated 
electricity is especially attractive, given telcos’ 
network footprint and the daytime demand on it. 
Solar panels can partially satisfy that demand and, 
combined with a battery installation, can be used 
in the form of “load balancing” as an energy cost-
savings asset. For example, the Finnish mobile- 
network operator Elisa converted its lithium-ion 
battery capacity into a virtual power plant. The 
system stores energy from wind, solar, or local 
hydroelectric plants and releases it back onto the 
grid when supply levels fall and market prices rise. 
This virtual plant contributes to the stability of the 
local renewable energy system and provides a 

3  “How energy sourcing can help industrials manage record-high prices,” McKinsey, April 20, 2023.

The growing imperative of energy optimization for telco networks 

6

cost-saving opportunity. Elisa uses a proprietary, 
cloud-based AI/ML system daily to optimize its 
stored, consumed, and resold capacity based on its 
projected demand and energy prices. The approach 
offers greater control over energy sourcing, and 
the operational advantage of extending backup 
capacity from three to nine hours. It also provides 
a bit of income from energy released back to the 
grid, which strengthens the business case for green 
energy investments. 

Legacy fixed network decommissioning: Fiber 
networks’ energy consumption per connection 
can be 70 to 80 percent lower than copper. 
This disparity will only grow as more energy-
efficient fiber technologies emerge, so migrating 
copper connections and decommissioning 
copper networks are critical. The extent of the 
decommissioning benefits is determined by the 
scope of implementation involved. A key aspect of 
copper-network phaseouts is the ability to migrate 
customers in a given network cluster so that the 
telco doesn’t have to maintain a copper network in 
parallel to newly deployed fiber. Comprehensive 
migration requires both fiber availability and a 
commercial campaign to persuade customers to 
upgrade to fiber. The opportunity goes beyond 
copper, however; central offices house energy-
hungry equipment that supports other services, 
such as legacy transmission and B2B platforms, 
which can also be migrated to products based on  
fiber underlay.

Successful migration of copper and other legacy-
product customers in whole network clusters can 
reduce server space needs enough to enable 
decommissioning entire buildings, since fiber 
networks require so much less server infrastructure. 
This can be an important consideration when 
designing the architecture of new fiber clusters. 
Partial building decommissioning can bring 
benefits. But telcos may want to weigh the more-
immediate capital-expense savings from using 
legacy buildings for aggregation points against the 
potentially greater long-term operating-expense 
savings of simplifying building footprints after 
decommissioning copper lines. Some operators 
have plans to reduce their central office space by 
more than 50 percent in the transition from copper 

to fiber-to-the-home (FTTH), leveraging longer 
loop lengths in fiber. While the main rationale for 
this kind of simplification is related to real estate, 
it also benefits several operational expense 
components, most notably the energy consumption 
required for air conditioning.

Decommissioning buildings can also fuel energy 
optimization by enabling the redesign of cooling 
systems. Because fiber requires less space for 
servers, cooling demand can drop dramatically, 
from whole rooms cooled by industrial-grade air 
conditioning units to a limited number of racks 
requiring much simpler cooling solutions. Even 
if this change does involve some initial capital 
investment, the savings that result should arrive 
quickly.

A successful decommissioning is always a 
cross-organizational effort. The technology and 
operations organizations have to design and 
implement the decommissioning, while commercial 
leadership needs to incentivize migrations and 
phase out legacy products. Alignment between 
decommissioning plans, fiber rollout strategy, and 
capital allocations needed for the desired energy 
optimization requires involvement of the finance 
and strategy units. 

Two fundamental enablers
Achieving this kind of optimization takes more 
than a vision and strategy for energy consumption. 
To derive the full value possible from energy 
optimization, operators need to put in place the 
right operating model and technology enablers to 
support it. 

Clear decision-making governance: Most telco 
operating models spread energy decisions across 
multiple senior stakeholders, usually a combination 
of chief technology officer, chief procurement 
officer, and chief sustainability officer. This joint 
responsibility is not necessarily an impediment to 
change, but when not supported by clear decision-
making governance, the resulting uncertainty 
can slow transformation and value creation. For 
example, a chief technology officer may have 
a vision for reducing consumption through a 

The growing imperative of energy optimization for telco networks 

7

site design overhaul, but without buy-in from 
procurement on purchasing, finance on investments, 
and commercial operations on quality control, 
there is no way to fully realize the potential of the 
proposed initiatives.

To successfully support energy transformation, 
some key operating elements should be in place. 
First, a single senior leader should own the end-to-
end vision and strategy, which includes consumption 
reduction, price control, and strategic investments 
to sustain the transformation. That leader should 
work closely with other senior decision makers 
in their areas of expertise but should have final 
responsibility for carrying out the energy vision. Also, 
the senior leader’s work should be supported by 
KPIs and clear governance to ensure collaboration 
across the organization on the shared goal.

Technology enablers: Analytics advancements 
such as digital twins and IoT devices such as 
smart meters can help provide detailed and timely 
understanding of energy consumption across a 
telco’s network, and even help seize opportunities 
quickly. 

Digital twins are based on models that capture 
data from physical assets in real time to simulate 
them virtually. In the context of telecommunications 
networks, they can visualize and analyze traffic 
patterns, operational metrics, equipment usage, 
and resource consumption. When applied to energy 
optimization, a digital twin can help size and capture 
the energy savings opportunity by detecting outlier 
sites and identifying the drivers of overconsumption. 
A digital twin can also help deploy new energy-
efficient sites by finding the optimal equipment 
and layout configurations. Moreover, detailed 
energy consumption projections can inform energy 
procurement, strengthening the implementation 
of pricing levers such as hedging or power 
purchase agreements. In more advanced digital 
twin use cases, multiple telcos can collaborate to 
develop cross-trained learning models to produce 
more rapid and qualitative insights soon after 
implementation.

4  “Digital twins: How to build the first win” McKinsey, October 2022.

A North American telecom operator used an 
energy-focused digital twin to achieve an annual 
energy cost reduction of more than $100 million. 
By standardizing energy cost and consumption 
data across its network, the telco was able to 
identify anomalies and understand underlying 
drivers more rapidly. Initiatives implemented 
included data-driven decision making on 
decommissions, real-time network optimization, 
and improving the performance of vendor 
equipment. Additionally, the company uses its 
digital twin’s standardized data and consumption 
models to improve calculations of emissions and 
energy cost forecasting.

Digital twins and other technology enablers 
require a data infrastructure to enable consistent 
insights across the network, which is made up 
of multiple asset types and geographies. This 
can be a challenge for network operators, who 
are often awash in unstructured data. Smart 
meters can help augment a network operator’s 
data infrastructure and ability to understand 
energy consumption across the network based 
on real-time sensor data. After putting in place a 
consistent data infrastructure and measurements 
to feed into it, telcos need to have a certain level 
of analytics capabilities.⁴ The maturity of the 
data infrastructure will determine the difficulty 
of providing valuable insights. For example, a 
customized data infrastructure with limited 
consistency across the network will require more-
skilled analytics teams and customized analytics 
models to clean data and extract actionable 
insights. On the other end, a single, consistent 
digital twin of the network enables implementation 
of plug-and-play analytics models, with quicker, 
more in-depth and typically more accurate insights. 

Technology can also play an important role in acting 
on opportunities identified by analytics initiatives. 
Increasingly, energy optimization levers can be 
delivered remotely, provided the right technology 
investments are in place. For example, remote 
network-management capabilities can enable 

The growing imperative of energy optimization for telco networks 

8

instant and at-scale implementation of improvement 
actions, such as air conditioning temperature 
control and remote capacity optimization. This helps 
avoid operational complexity, delays, and costly 
implementation plans, while ensuring consistency in 
implementation as well as measurement and control 
of deployed changes. 

feasible to pursue and achieve. Given that 
network usage accounts for three-quarters 
of a telco’s energy consumption, achieving 
the 15 to 30 percent total energy cost savings 
possible with the methods we describe would 
be significant. 

An ongoing imperative
Telecom operators stand to benefit substantially 
from thorough energy optimization. Much of the 
benefit depends on data maturity and deployment 
of the right analytics. Telcos that are able to do this 
well are more likely to outperform their peers. 

The pressures driving the need for network energy 
optimization are expected to remain, if not increase. 
Energy costs and consumption are likely to continue 
rising, as is the need for decarbonization. Also, of 
the challenges the telecommunications industry 
faces, energy optimization is among the most 

A successful network energy optimization 
effort starts with an analysis of the optimization 
options available and the value at stake in 
undertaking them. Ideally, a holistic set of 
potential levers should be considered, to ensure 
options that may seem on their face to be too 
difficult or to offer too little benefit, are given 
proper analysis. For example, even a decade 
ago, solar might have been easily dismissed, 
but solar energy options have advanced 
considerably since then. Finally, implementing 
a network energy optimization program should 
involve both technological enablers and 
operating model changes, if the full benefit of 
the tech solutions is to be realized. 

Javier Gil Gómez is a partner in McKinsey’s Madrid office, Aleksander Matlok is a consultant in the Wroclaw office, Tiago 
Silveira is a partner in the Lisbon office, and Lieven Verboven is a consultant in the Brussels office.

The authors wish to thank Duarte Begonha, Sebastian Cubela, Fan Gao, Gerardo de Geest, Tomás Lajous, Duarte Maher, 
Ferran Muntaner, Albert Perez Riba, and Arvind Samudrala for their contributions to this article.

Copyright © 2024  McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.

The growing imperative of energy optimization for telco networks 

9

