Technology, Media & Telecommunications Practice  

How generative AI could 
revitalize profitability for telcos 

The new technology offers the sector a real opportunity to reverse its stagnant  
fortunes. But seizing it will require embracing innovation and agility to an  
unprecedented degree.

This article is a collaborative effort by Stephen Creasy, Ignacio Ferrero, Tomás Lajous, Víctor Trigo, and Benjamim  
Vieira, representing views from McKinsey’s Technology, Media & Telecommunications Practice.

February 2024

© Getty Images

49

Amid the intense competition and cost-cutting 
confronting telcos, early evidence suggests that 
generative AI (gen AI) could be the catalyst to 
reignite growth after a decade of stagnation. But 
will it be a groundbreaking differentiator or simply 
table stakes? 

Already the technology is on track to become 
a new norm in the industry. Most telco leaders 
we surveyed1 say they are developing gen AI 
solutions that range from pilots to full-scale 
deployments, and leading telcos such as AT&T, 
SK Telecom, and Vodafone have made much-
publicized early gen AI commitments and 
launched trials. Some telcos around the world 
have started to experience significant double-
digit percentage impact from this technology. 
One European telco recently increased 
conversion rates for marketing campaigns by 
40 percent while reducing costs by using gen AI 
to personalize content. A Latin American telco 
increased call center agent productivity by 25 
percent and improved the quality of its customer 
experience by enhancing agent skills and 
knowledge with gen-AI-driven recommendations. 

Most impressive is that these telcos deployed the 
models in just weeks—the first went live in two 
weeks, and the second in five. For an industry 
with a mixed track record for capitalizing on 
new technologies and legacy systems that slow 
innovation, these early results and deployment 
times illustrate the potentially transformative 
power of gen AI. 

These aren’t one-offs. Pretrained models that 
can be fine-tuned in days for use cases are 
readily available, enabling organizations to 
bring proofs-of-concept to life with minimal 
up-front investment, achieve impact out of the 
gate, and scale their efforts. Our experience 
working with clients indicates the potential for 
telcos to achieve significant EBITDA impact 
with gen AI. In some cases, estimates indicate 
returns on incremental margins increasing 3 to 
4 percentage points in two years, and as much 
as 8 to 10 percentage points in five years, by 

enhancing customer revenue through improved 
customer life cycle management and decisively 
reducing costs across all domains.

However, while nearly all of the 130 telcos we 
surveyed are doing something with gen AI, our 
survey findings suggest a palpable sense of 
caution and skepticism in the industry. More 
than 85 percent of the executives surveyed 
are cautious to attribute more than 20 percent 
revenue or cost savings impact by domain, 
with the greatest enthusiasm for a radical 
transformation in customer service (Exhibit 1). 

This blend of optimism and restraint highlights 
the critical juncture the industry faces. Seizing 
the gen AI opportunity to differentiate services 
and achieve sustainable growth will require 
the hidebound industry to embrace innovation, 
exploration, and agility at an unprecedented level 
and move from decoupled AI efforts to a holistic, 
AI-native telco.2  

The chance for telcos to make this change has 
never been more accessible. The industry has 
struggled these last ten-plus years to achieve the 
potential of “traditional” AI, given the complexity 
and legacy processes involved. In addition to 
the significant impact gen AI can bring to bear 
with entirely new use cases and applications, 
its ability to learn from vast amounts of diverse 
data and interact in near-human-like ways may 
be the tipping point for accelerating broader AI 
programs and the building blocks that enable 
them, fueling company-wide transformations. 

Furthermore, the imperative for such change has 
never been greater. Because gen AI democratizes 
access to powerful capabilities, any telco—a 
small operator or large incumbent—can reshape 
customer expectations and its organizational 
efficiency. In doing so, they can potentially narrow 
previously unassailable competitive advantages 
and overturn long-standing barriers to growth. 
Those at the forefront of this movement stand to 
position themselves to regain growth faster and 
capture a more significant share of the nearly 

1 The online survey was in the field from November 9, 2023, to December 6, 2023, and garnered responses from 130 telco operators in 
North America, Latin America, Europe, Africa, Asia, and the Middle East. 
2 See “The AI-native telco: Radical transformation to thrive in turbulent times,” McKinsey, Feb. 27, 2023.

How generative AI could revitalize profitability for telcos 

50

Exhibit 1 
A large majority of telcos have already cut costs with generative AI use 
A large majority of telcos have already cut costs with generative AI use cases in 
cases in customer service and networks.
customer service and networks.

Cost reduction attributed to generative AI
in different domains,¹ %

0

1–5

6–20

21–50

50+

Don’t know

2

1
2

8

15

40

34

2

6

6

87

3

13

35

47

1
1

3

15

30

50

6

7

32

39

16

Customer
service

Network

IT

Marketing
and sales

Support
functions

1Gen AI CxO Survey 2023, n =  130, Q: What is the impact (% cost reduction) attributed to generative AI in the different domains? Percentages consider 
answers only from respondents claiming to have achieved impact and to have at least some use cases in execution; figures may not sum to 100% because
of rounding. 
Source: McKinsey analysis

McKinsey & Company

$100 billion in incremental value (Exhibit 2). 
That is in addition to the $140 billion to $180 
billion in productivity gains that gen AI will 
create in the industry above what could be 
unlocked by traditional AI. 

How can telco leaders use the technology 
to drive AI transformations and unlock new 
value? What challenges do they face? And 
what will it take to succeed? This article offers 
insights into these critical questions, drawing 
extensively from our research, industry survey, 
and firsthand experience implementing these 
technologies.

Gen AI today in the telco industry
Gen AI represents the latest advance in AI, and 
it may arguably be one of the most important. 
The technology’s ability to analyze more and 
different types of data such as code, images, 
and text, and to create new content, enables 
new levels of personalization, performance, 
and customer engagement. With today’s 
capabilities, many use cases are already 
possible across network operations, customer 
service, marketing and sales, IT, and support 
functions. 

How generative AI could revitalize profitability for telcos 

51

Exhibit 2 
Generative AI has the potential to unlock value beyond that previously 
Generative AI has the potential to unlock value beyond that previously 
offered by advanced analytics and ‘traditional’ AI.
offered by advance analytics and ‘traditional’ AI.

Generative AI’s potential impact on global telecommunications industry,¹ $ billion

140–180

450–680

60–100

310–500

250–400

~15–40%
incremental
economic
impact

~35–70%
incremental
economic
impact

Advanced analytics,
traditional machine learning
and deep learning¹ 

New
generative
AI use cases

Total
use-case-driven
potential

All worker productivity
enabled by generative AI,
including in use cases

Total AI
economic
potential

1Updated use case estimates from “Notes from the AI frontier: Applications and value of deep learning,” McKinsey Global Institute, April 17, 2018.
Source: McKinsey Global Institute, The economic potential of generative AI, June 14, 2023

McKinsey & Company

These use cases can both enhance existing AI  
capabilities (through the inclusion of new 
unstructured data sources) and provide new sources 
of value (through gen AI and in combination with 
traditional AI solutions) to deliver significant impact 
across all key domains. Customer service and 
marketing and sales currently make up the largest 
share of total impact (Exhibit 3).  

Examples of such use cases based on early pilots 
include the following:  

 — In customer service, where the technology can 
vastly improve customer experience, increase 
agent productivity, and enable fully digital 
interactions. A Latin American telco is enhancing 
its customer service AI chatbots to improve agent 
support, a move it anticipates will reduce costs by 
15 to 20 percent. The telco also is using gen AI to 
summarize voice and written client interactions 
in nearly a dozen use cases, with the expectation 
that it can reduce associated costs by up to 80 
percent.

 — In marketing and sales, where gen AI enables 

hyperpersonalization, deeper customer insights, 
and faster content generation. A European telco 
is using the technology to identify new sales 
leads from customer calls, with its pilot project 
achieving a more than 10 percent conversion rate. 
The company can now also create personalized 
messages and visual media to target individual 
customer microsegments. To do this, the telco 
feeds a gen AI model standard marketing 
messages, customer data (including household 
details, type of phone they use, and where they 
live), and cognitive biases (for example, whether 
the customer would be more receptive to 
messaging that evokes scarcity, such as a limited-
time offer, or emphasizes authority, such as 
endorsements, awards, and industry experience). 

 — In network operations, where gen AI can optimize 

technology configurations, enhance labor 
productivity, extract customer insights from 
social media, and improve inventory and network 
planning and management through the ability to 

How generative AI could revitalize profitability for telcos 

52

Exhibit 3 
Gen AI is expected to enable a long list of use cases and deliver significant 
Gen AI is expected to enable a long list of use cases and deliver significant 
value to telcos, with customer service and marketing and sales accounting 
value to telcos, with customer service and marketing and sales accounting 
for the largest share of total impact. 
for the largest share of total impact.

Distribution of impact by business domain¹

Share of total impact, %

Customer
service

Marketing
and sales

Network

IT

Share of surveyed business
leaders focused on domain, %

Support
functions

~35
~85

~35
~45

~15
~62

~10
~55

~5
~10

Example use cases

Customer-facing
chatbots, call-routing
performance, agent
copilots, bespoke
invoice creation

Content generation,
hyperpersonalization,
copilots for store
personnel, customer
sentiment analysis
and synthesis

Network inventory
mapping, network
optimization via
customer sentiment
analysis, enabling
self-healing via
customer sentiment
analysis on network
problems

Copilots for software
development,
synthetic data
generation, code
migration, IT
support chatbots

Procurement
optimization,
workplace productivity,
internal knowledge
management, content
generation, HR Q&A

1The distribution of impact by business domain is based on our experience working with telco companies to deploy gen AI and includes impacts on both capital 
expenditure and EBITDA.

McKinsey & Company

mine unstructured data. One large telco is 
using the technology to accelerate network 
mapping by analyzing and structuring data 
about network components, including 
specifications and maintenance information, 
from supplier contracts. This will enable the 
telco to more accurately assess component 
compatibility, maintenance requirements, 
and more—an effort anticipated to improve 
operational planning and optimize capital 
productivity. 

 — In IT, where the technology can accelerate 

software migrations and development. Gen AI 
offers telcos a path to reduce their mounting 
technical debt and enable capabilities 
previously deferred because of time and 

resource constraints.  Organizations are 
applying gen AI to streamline the entire 
software life cycle, from documenting how 
a new product, feature, or service will be 
perceived by end users to generating and 
scanning code for vulnerabilities before 
launch. One McKinsey study found that 
software developers can complete coding 
tasks up to twice as fast with gen AI.3

 — In support functions, where gen AI will 
reduce the costs associated with back-
office operations and improve employee 
productivity. A European telco uses the 
technology in a number of ways, including: 
shortening procurement analysis and 
negotiation strategy insights from weeks 

3  “Unleashing developer productivity with generative AI,” McKinsey, June 27, 2023.

How generative AI could revitalize profitability for telcos 

53

to a few hours, reducing recruiting costs with 
automated screening and recommendations, 
improving employee productivity using internal 
gen AI chatbots and copilots, and automating 
most internal content generation. Combined, 
the company anticipates these efforts will 
improve employee productivity by  
30 percent. 

encounter difficulties in justifying use cases—a 
clear signal that much of the push has come from 
the bottom, not the top, and that more work is 
needed to elevate gen AI to a CEO-led priority. 
Moreover, finding appropriate talent and obtaining 
quality data remain significant challenges for telcos, 
although confidence about solving these rose 
among surveyed leaders this year as compared  
to last.

New sources of value may also emerge from turning 
internal uses cases into new products for their 
customers. For example, a customer care solution 
may be offered on demand to small business 
customers seeking ways to improve their own call 
center’s productivity and service.

Telco leaders’ view ahead: Real change 
and real challenges  
In the wake of their initial successes, business 
leaders we surveyed say they plan to maintain 
or double their budgets for gen AI in the next 
year and invest in more than 50 dedicated full-
time employees to pursue their gen AI ambitions 
effectively. More than half are already scaling up 
use cases.

Moreover, survey findings indicate that the 
technology also had a knock-on effect across all AI 
initiatives. Compared to responses from McKinsey’s 
2022 digital twin survey, we see a 30-percentage-
point increase in business leaders who want to 
invest in and focus more on data and analytics. 

However, despite the magnitude of the opportunity 
and the level of interest (and need), our survey 
found few who follow the kind of holistic approach 
required to succeed at scale. Only about one-third 
of telco leaders said they have a capability-building 
plan for employees on gen AI or are investing in 
change management efforts—two core building 
blocks for building a culture of innovation and the 
test-and-learn mindset. A similar share said gen AI 
has yet to be treated as an organizational priority, 
and that proponents of the technology often 

 Finally, the survey findings suggest that gen AI has 
already begun to influence long-standing market 
dynamics. While European telecom operators 
have traditionally lagged in AI and technology 
transformations, survey findings indicate that 
they are pulling ahead of those in North America 
in their adoption of gen AI, especially in areas 
such as network operations (71 percent compared 
to 58 percent) and IT (67 percent compared to 
55 percent). This shift may be a result of greater 
maturity in managing data privacy. Small and 
large operators report similar views on where to 
prioritize, focusing on customer service and IT in 
similar measure, suggesting the possibility of new 
competitive pressures emerging for incumbents 
(Exhibit 4).

The building blocks for a successful 
gen AI journey 
In order to achieve the above-mentioned impact, 
organizations will need to move away from the 
labyrinth of proofs-of-concept and scale the 
technology. As with any digital or AI initiative, we 
find there are no shortcuts in doing this. The same 
core building blocks are necessary, namely (1) a 
business-led roadmap, (2) the right talent, (3) an 
operating model for scale, (4) technology built 
for speed and innovation, (5) quality data that is 
easily accessible and managed in a responsible 
and accountable way, and (6) change management 
to ensure adoption and scaling.4 These are 
fundamental pillars in effectively scaling use cases 
and capturing sustainable impact from gen AI in the 
journey toward an AI-native telco.  

4  See “Rewired to outcompete,” McKinsey Quarterly, June 20, 2023.

How generative AI could revitalize profitability for telcos 

54

Exhibit 4 
Small and large operators are focused on generative AI use cases for customer 
Small and large operators are focused on generative AI use cases for 
service and IT in similar measure.
customer service and IT in similar measure.

Focus on gen AI for customer
service and IT use cases,¹ %

93

85

79

79

75

< $1 billion

$1 billion–$5 billion 

$5 billion–$10 billion 

> $10 billion

60

57

53

58

57

53 54

54

51

37

29

Customer service

Network

IT

Marketing and sales

Support functions

1GenAI CxO Survey 2023, n = 130, Q: Focus domains in gen AI—Select the dimensions that apply depending on how you define generative AI in your
organization. Percentages may not sum to 100% as this question contained multiple selections.
Source: McKinsey analysis

McKinsey & Company

13

11

7

7

However, while the same holistic approach is 
required, gen AI’s unique capabilities—its ability 
to surface new insights from seemingly unrelated 
data, its reliance on large language models from 
third-party vendors, and its transformative impact 
on roles and work—present new challenges that 
will require greater agility and additional oversight. 
Next, we outline key differences and provide 
recommendations on how telcos can best  
tackle them.

Strategy: Determine when to build, buy, or fine-
tune solutions
As with any AI initiative, leaders will need to align 
on vision, value, and road map, assessing both 
risks and opportunities, and communicating 
guidelines for use across the organization. In 
building a road map, telco leaders will face a 
choice: use a commercial, off-the-shelf solution 
if one exists, fine-tune existing large language 
models with internal data, or build and train a new 

foundation model from scratch (what we refer to 
as the “taker,” “shaper,” and “maker” approach, 
respectively). 

Each is suitable for different use cases and has 
its own costs, requiring leaders to develop not 
only a clear vision and strategy for which use 
cases to pursue, but also how. One mistake we 
see some telcos making is building common gen 
AI solutions from scratch—a content generator or 
call summarization solution for example—when 
there are nearly a dozen out-of-the-box options 
on the market today from gen AI start-ups or 
SaaS vendors injecting gen AI capabilities into 
existing solutions. Only one-third of surveyed 
telco leaders say they buy products off the shelf, 
suggesting that many telcos continue to embrace 
a do-it-yourself model. This move is likely to 
slow innovation and distract talent from more 
differentiating use cases, as it has in the past with 
other technologies.

How generative AI could revitalize profitability for telcos 

55

Instead, leaders should strongly consider 
partnering with gen AI solution providers and 
enterprise software vendors for solutions that 
aren’t very complex or telco specific. This is 
particularly critical in instances where any delays 
in implementation will put them at a disadvantage 
against competitors already leveraging these 
services. The handful of solutions leaders can 
concentrate on shaping or making themselves 
should enable them to differentiate their offerings 
or address a strategic business priority, such as 
delivering the best service or network coverage, 
and drive sustained economic impact. To do 
this, one CIO at a large telco is bringing together 
business leaders across all key domains to assess 
hundreds of potential use cases and build a road 
map for determining when to build, buy, or fine-
tune models, and for prioritizing resources and 
building momentum with early successes.

Capturing the full potential will also require 
significant upskilling of existing staff—everyone 
from data scientists to business leaders—on gen 
AI, including the risks of uploading proprietary 
data into third-party language models. Some 
telcos are setting up internal certification and 
university-led training programs to ensure their 
teams have the right skills and capabilities to 
innovate and execute with the technology. For 
instance, a large telco created a badging system 
to identify gen-AI-ready employees who have 
completed the company’s sessions on use, risk, 
and effective prompting techniques given by its 
AI, legal, and risk experts. Following certification, 
users participate in weekly discussion groups 
to stay abreast of changes and discuss their 
successes and challenges. McKinsey research 
has found that such efforts improve the quality of 
prompts.  

Talent: Upskill and expand internal expertise to 
innovate with gen AI
The speed of innovation that is now possible with 
gen AI puts new pressure on telcos accustomed 
to outsourcing tech talent to build in-house 
AI expertise. Consider the experiences of two 
telcos—one that continued offshoring and 
outsourcing tech talent and one that created 
a dedicated AI team of ten data scientists and 
engineers. In the time the first telco took to draft 
requirements for outsourcing gen AI use-case 
development, the second built and deployed four 
gen AI solutions.  

While this new technology democratizes AI by 
requiring fewer highly specialized data scientists 
to build the models, it requires new skills, such as 
gen AI prompt engineering, which may sometimes 
be a separate skill embedded within traditional 
roles. It also requires significantly more data 
engineers and subject matter experts who 
understand what data to collect and how, and 
who can oversee daily quality reviews as new 
forms of data are generated and consumed by 
these systems, including user queries, responses, 
and feedback.

Operating model: Orchestrate efforts 
enterprise-wide
A significant portion of implemented gen AI 
solutions can be adapted and reused in multiple 
use cases. A gen AI chatbot developed to 
improve agent productivity, for example, can be 
repurposed with additional fine-tuning or data 
to answer frequently asked questions by new 
employees or provide IT support. An off-the-shelf 
content generation system for drafting sales 
proposals may also streamline the development 
of marketing and business plans. 

As a result, we’re beginning to see telcos adopt 
more centralized decision making around gen 
AI development. This shift includes a greater 
emphasis on adopting reusable services and self-
service components, an evolution of key functions, 
such as risk, FinOps, and transformation offices, 
to be more focused on gen AI, and the creation 
of “control towers” that can oversee all gen AI 
investments and development efforts. In practice, 
that can mean, for example, prioritizing the 
use-case pipeline, identifying opportunities for 
reusability, setting key performance indicators to 
measure and track impact at the level of both use 

How generative AI could revitalize profitability for telcos 

56

case and enterprise, and managing suppliers and 
risk. A European telco’s control tower evaluates 
the effects of its gen AI transformation based on 
three dimensions—financial impact, user adoption, 
and model performance—and aggregates the 
data in dashboards that enable the company’s 
top executives to keep tabs on the organization’s 
progress. Similarly, a Latin American telco uses 
a control tower to consolidate and standardize 
supplier contracts, tracking key metrics such as 
scope, duration, and renewal to compare providers 
more easily, identify potential redundancies, and 
reduce the manual work of digitizing content. 

Technology: Create a blueprint for reusability, 
innovation, and excellence 
Organizations will also need a technology blueprint 
that enables reusability. For instance, the blueprint 
should include a framework for determining 
which large language models to use and when 
(commercial or open-source models, for example, 
or those that support hybrid workloads). And it 
should lay out how to scale a pilot—for example, 
to extend a pilot that serves 100 call agents to 
serve more than 10,000 agents with the same 
latency and cost profile. The blueprint should 
also have a framework for determining which 
gen AI capabilities can be turned into ready-to-
use modules to be plugged into different use 
cases. One large telco, for example, has begun 
to identify and develop components designed 
to fetch product data from a large dataset and 
generate content from it that could be reused 
by data science teams across domains such as 
customer service, network operations, and sales 
and marketing.

With new gen AI research and capabilities 
being announced weekly and sometimes daily, 
technology teams will also need a dedicated 
gen AI innovation lab to keep abreast of industry 
changes and test emerging solutions. For example, 
one large telco’s chief data and analytics officer 
recruited PhD graduates from universities to staff 
a gen AI innovation lab and build bespoke solutions 
ahead of the market to gain a competitive edge.

Once new models are deployed, telcos will need 
to monitor model outputs daily to ensure quality 
and accuracy do not waver as models learn and 
adapt their responses based on user queries 
and feedback. Large language model operations 
(LLMOps) is an emerging practice that aims to 
streamline the daily management and monitoring 
of gen AI models. A key component of LLMOps is a 
dedicated operations team to oversee all deployed 
gen AI models, continuously monitoring for issues 
and rapidly adapting solutions when needed, just 
as a network operations team might do for network 
performance. Organizations can start small 
now and build capability in this area as the field 
of LLMOps develops. For example, a European 
telco started by assigning three data scientists to 
monitor its handful of deployed models and plans 
to expand the team as more models are deployed.

Data: Capture everything, especially 
unstructured data, and ensure responsible use
One of gen AI’s superpowers is its ability to 
uncover connections in seemingly unrelated 
datasets, which has implications for how 
organizations choose to collect and measure data, 
and how they manage it to ensure responsible use.

Data collection: Telcos will need to think more 
broadly about data collection, mapping more 
data, setting up pipelines for unstructured data, 
and creating synthetic data to evaluate outputs. 
A US telco, for instance, has reached beyond 
its traditional datasets in its work to develop a 
customer service agent copilot that will reduce 
average resolution times by 40 percent across 
more than one million annual chats. As part of 
their work, the company’s data scientists gather 
institutional knowledge from agent emails and 
interactions to enable the chatbot to learn from 
real situations and challenges, and offer detailed 
descriptions of how to resolve specific issues. 
The team also creates synthetic data using a 
large language model to create sample customer 
questions and answers, with agents reviewing the 
outputs for accuracy.

How generative AI could revitalize profitability for telcos 

57

Responsible use: These types of more 
sophisticated data strategies and tactics come 
with new regulatory, intellectual property, and 
data privacy concerns. Risks abound in this 
new era, particularly with customer insights, 
recommendations, and network optimizations 
being analyzed and generated by third-party 
large language models and open-source 
environments. To address the novel risks, telcos 
need to expand their data governance programs 
to address unstructured data. For example, one 
multinational telco hardware provider created 
a robust data access process to validate what 
data can be used in gen AI use cases. Data 
owners along with legal and security experts 
work together to validate each use case based 
on several criteria including the criticality of the 
data to the business (data that is deemed of high 
importance cannot be input into commercial large 
language models); the end users (some users 
cannot access certain data assets); and the risks 
if the gen AI solution gives an incorrect answer. 
The team manages the process in an agile manner 
using a simple Microsoft Power App to manage 
and automate the workflow across teams, and 
conducts monthly forums to review the process 
and develop improvements. The organization has 
reviewed more than 200 use cases, rejecting a 
number due to intellectual property and other 
risks, to ensure responsible use for the company.

Change management: Ensure adoption and 
scaling are CEO-led 
Every role, including everyone from network 
technicians to HR professionals, will be impacted 
by gen AI, making vital the need for leaders to 
begin preparing their employees now to capture 
the full value of this transformative technology. 
With many employees already using the 
technology in their personal lives, organizations 
will need to consider how to help them learn to 
apply the technology in a professional context, 
upskilling and reskilling staff at scale. Such 
work can be made easier using gen AI, for 
example to develop and deliver customized and 
adaptive training programs, and even to onboard 
employees. 

For example, another European telco saw 
firsthand the importance of change management 
and upskilling when it created a gen-AI-driven 
knowledge “expert” that helped agents get 
answers to customer questions more quickly. 
The initial pilot, which didn’t include any process 
changes or employee education, realized just 
a 5 percent improvement in productivity. As 
the organization prepared to scale the solution, 
leaders dedicated 90 percent of the budget 
to agent training and change management 
processes, which facilitated the adoption of the 
solution and resulted in more than 30 percent 
productivity improvement. The telco also used 
gen AI to create upskilling programs and provide 
agents with personalized recommendations for 
improvement once the solution was rolled out.

Even though so many companies have already 
achieved real cost savings and revenue 
improvements with gen AI, these are still the early 
days of the technology. In the next five years, 
emerging capabilities—including significant 
improvements in natural language understanding, 
advances in human-like reasoning across 
multiple topics, and availability of real-time 
solutions with increased accuracy and fewer 
hallucinations—should unlock even more exciting 
opportunities beyond the basic improvements 
seen today.

Combined, these gen AI capabilities will enable 
telcos to redefine industry standards and set 
themselves apart in the market. For example, 
network operations could be enhanced and 
quality standards radically recast with AI copilots 
that evaluate images from technicians, provide 
accurate recommendations for remedies, and 
automatically initiate interventions or work 
orders. In sales, cognitive copilots could conduct 
sentiment analysis on customer calls in real 
time and guide sales representatives on how 
best to respond, profoundly altering sales 
strategies, customer engagement, and overall 
sales outcomes. Customer service channels 

How generative AI could revitalize profitability for telcos 

58

using cognitive chatbots could seamlessly 
answer complex queries in real time while taking 
into account privacy and fairness concerns, 
thereby revolutionizing efficiency while offering 
customers a human-like experience. Across the 
enterprise, greater efficiency and productivity 
could emerge, as domain-specific solutions 
endowed with an organization’s institutional 
knowledge power an unprecedented wave of 
automation and AI-driven decision making.

The sudden rise of gen AI has brought the 
dream of the AI-native telco significantly 

closer to becoming a reality. With it comes the 
opportunity for telcos to reverse their recent 
stagnant fortunes and usher in a new era of 
growth and innovation. The journey will not be 
easy, however. To answer the call of gen AI, telcos 
will need to quickly adopt a culture of innovation 
and experimentation enabled by the core 
building blocks shared in this article, one they 
have previously struggled to build and maintain. 
With the technology moving so rapidly, those 
operators that embrace it now are likeliest to 
create a significant lead that will be difficult for 
others to follow.

Stephen Creasy is a partner in McKinsey’s Copenhagen office, Ignacio Ferrero is a partner in the Miami office, 
Tomás Lajous is a senior partner in the New York City office, Víctor Trigo is an associate partner in the Madrid 
office, and Benjamim Vieira is a senior partner in the Lisbon office.

The authors wish to thank Joshan Cherian Abraham, Eric Buesing, Michael Chui, Guilherme Cruz, Sebastian Cubela, 
Andrea Fariña, Roger Roberts, and Kayvaun Rowshankish for their contributions to this article.

Copyright © 2024 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.

How generative AI could revitalize profitability for telcos 

59

