Technology, Media & Telecommunications Practice 

The network is the product: 
How AI can put telco customer 
experience in focus

With advances in AI, telecom operators can better understand individual 
customers’ network experience, enabling ROI-maximizing capital allo-
cation, higher reliability, and better commercial outcomes. 

This article is a collaborative effort by Borja Belda, Sebastian Cubela, Brendan Gaffey, Sebastián González, 
and Tomás Lajous, representing views from McKinsey’s Technology, Media & Telecommunications Practice.

February 2024

© Getty Images

1

Telecom operators have long managed their 
networks as a technical asset more than a true 
product, maximizing network performance without 
drawing a clear link to customer outcomes. Recent 
advances in AI and telcos’ data maturity, however, 
open the door to a new, more sophisticated 
approach that treats the network as a core product 
to be managed with the type of sharp focus on 
customer experience (CX) that is the hallmark 
of software as a service (SaaS) and other tech 
providers. As a result, telcos can meet customers’ 
needs before they are even aware of them. By using 
AI to derive valuable insights about how customers 
interact with this product—the network—telcos 
can conceptualize the specific customer needs 
that the product fulfills, articulate product success, 
and translate the resulting business strategies into 
technical requirements.

These advanced CX measurements can help fuel a 
series of successes that can combine to build even 
more wins. For example, AI-driven CX intelligence 
can help identify customers who are up to five times 
more likely to churn in response to a poor network 
experience; it can identify opportunities to reduce 
capital expenditure by 5 percent to 10 percent; and 
it can also help generate a 10 percent to 15 percent 
increase in sales conversion, all of which can further 
drive up customer experience. 

The limitations of past practices for measuring 
experience are rooted in the fact that they have been 
based largely on customer surveys and/or technical 
KPIs such as capacity or signal strength that 
engineers believed were most relevant to customers. 
While effective to a certain extent, these have fallen 
short. Engineers’ KPIs are a subset of what matters 
to customers and treat all customers the same 
regardless of the differences in their needs, while 
customer surveys rely on subjective memory and 
sampling rather than objective individual customer 
insights. These methods also overlook customers’ 
actual experience, which involves emotional and 
technical elements that customers may not be aware 
of, and are disconnected from commercial outcomes.

Until recently, telcos didn’t have much choice, since 
it has been difficult if not impossible to understand 
precisely how changes in network performance 

affect individual customers. Without the ability to 
correlate network actions to customer behavior, 
they had no way to answer questions such as: If 
we add a new band in a cell site, would customers 
appreciate the difference? Will affected customers 
purchase more or churn less because of that move, 
or will everything remain the same? These types 
of questions are very common and answerable in 
other industries, particularly in SaaS- and app-
based businesses where the relationship between 
the product, its use, and the customer is closely 
monitored. 

Data maturity and advances in AI, however, can 
now be leveraged to bridge that gap. While staying 
within the bounds of data and privacy regulations, 
a telco can begin to understand how specific 
actions on the network actually affect individual 
end customers, whether or not customers have 
perceived those effects, and ultimately to engage 
in more efficient network management. Some 
pioneering operators are already moving in 
that direction. They have developed the ability 
to discern this relationship and become more 
efficient in their capital investments while looking 
for every opportunity to increase both the top and 
bottom lines. 

In this article, we’ll examine why network customer 
experience is increasingly important for telcos 
and why we believe a new approach is necessary; 
the key elements of such an approach and how 
multiple telcos are already using it to achieve 
encouraging results; and what it takes for a telco to 
begin to use AI in this way.

The growing relevance of CX  
for telcos
Today, CX is the key differentiating factor for 
creating value in telecommunications. Our 
research shows that 73 percent of senior 
telco executives see it as a top priority. In our 
surveys, the same senior telco executives told 
us that current methods do not provide specific 
information about what part of the customer’s 
experience influences their perspective, how to 
link tactics to variations in CX, or how to associate 
satisfaction scores with business outcomes. 

The network is the product: How AI can put telco customer experience in focus 

2

The result is that operators lack a granular view of 
customer experience, to the point that an operator 
can have the best overall network performance 
in a given market but not understand that certain 
customers in that same area are actually having a 
negative experience.

Existing scores that track network customer 
satisfaction have several shortcomings. Survey-
based scores tend to be overly subjective, relying 
on customer memory and perceptions of what 
they experienced, and they tend to skew toward 
negative experiences while overlooking important 
factors such as the customer’s choice of device or 
Wi-Fi setup. The data they produce include lagging 
indicators that cannot offer real-time insights and 
are based on sampling. Internally developed metrics 
(such as time above a certain throughput) can also 
fall short, in that they can be biased to what is easily 
measured, rather than what actually affects customer 
decisions. And last, the correlation between those 
metrics and business outcomes such as churn and 
growth is limited. All those factors limit the range of 
applications that a more complete score could offer, 
particularly in the commercial realm. 

By contrast, a robust, AI-enabled CX score explains 
commercial outcomes. In software and commercial 
contexts, CX takes into account emotional, cognitive, 
sensory, and behavioral factors, as well as brand 
perceptions, and the effect each of these has on 
customer behavior and the likelihood that customers 
return to use a product. In the network context, CX 
refers to the network performance factors that 
affect customer behavior. By leveraging detailed 
network performance information and AI, it is 
possible to produce highly granular and specific 
CX measurements, for example, for every single 
line every day, or even more detailed, every 30 
minutes. This allows telcos to move from “macro” 
to “micro” analysis, and tie network performance to 
specific customer behaviors. For example, rather 
than assessing the average latency for all customers 
in a New York City zip code last week, they could 
determine the latency for an individual customer 
last Tuesday between 10 and 10:30 a.m., their likely 
perception of that latency rate, and precisely which 
interventions make sense from an ROI perspective. 

With this level of precision and objective metrics, 
telcos can understand better which actions can 
lead to more positive business outcomes, and 
thus how to improve customer value management 
(churn prevention, for example), strengthen 
network operations (including issue detection and 
prioritization), and refine capital allocation. At scale, 
it can also be used more broadly to inform most 
decision making and transform the network into a 
key driver of value creation (Exhibit 1).

One telecommunications company was able to use 
this method of measuring network CX to identify 
customers 2.2 times more likely to churn than 
peers with better network experience (Exhibit 2). 
By combining those network CX measurements 
with the company’s existing churn model, it 
was able to improve the overall identification of 
potential churners and differentiate between 
those customers with both network issues and 
commercial problems (such as pricing issues) and 
those only dealing with major network problems 
(low churn risk in the churn model, but low network 
CX measurements) (Exhibit 3). This was extremely 
relevant because those two profiles call for 
different actions to prevent future churn. If network 
performance is good while CX is still poor, then the 
response needs to be commercial—for example, 
with discounts or a free 5G mobile phone. If the 
customer’s commercial experience is good, but the 
network performance is poor, then a free phone 
won’t help, and without upgrades to the network, 
the customer will likely leave. Using the defined, 
AI-based CX approach, the company succeeded in 
dropping its network-driven churn rate significantly. 
In the specific case, the network CX experience was 
being measured daily, for 100 percent of lines, and 
an average of 600 RAN sessions per customer line 
were analyzed. 

Value creation and enhanced  
decision making
The many opportunities to leverage improved 
network CX scores across the telecommunications 
organization fall into two main categories: network 
management (including network planning) and 
commercial management. Within these, the CX 
scores can be applied to multiple use cases such 

The network is the product: How AI can put telco customer experience in focus

3

Exhibit 1 
Building effective telecom network CX scores requires addressing five 
different dimensions. 

Dimension

A good score should be able to…

Example

Level of granularity …provide CX measurements at the level 

required by the use cases to be addressed. 
Typically two aspects are considered: unit (score 
per customer, per site, per zip code, etc) and 
frequency (daily, weekly, monthly). The finer the 
granularity, the better.

…differentiate those customers who are 
getting what they expect from the network from 
those who are not, and connect the negative 
experience to a specific business outcome 
(eg, increased customer churn, increased site 
alarms). Customers with the lowest scores will 
have different commercial outcomes from those 
with the highest scores.

…provide a clear explanation of why a 
customer’s score is what it is, usually leveraging 
subscores, and what needs to change to trigger 
improvement.

Correlation with 
business outcomes

Transparency and 
interpretability

Sources of insights  …leverage a broad range of information sources 

related exclusively to network performance 
and combine them to get a holistic picture of 
the customer interaction with the network. Only 
KPIs that the operator can modify should be 
included. For example, capacity is a good score 
input, while “time spent consuming video” is not, 
since the operator cannot modify it.

Customer 
personalization 

…tailor the relevance of the different KPIs to the 
preferences of the customer and the way they 
use the services.

CX measurements for every 
customer line and every site for 
every day.

30% of clients with the worst 
experience churn ~3x more than 
the average, and account for 
60+% of all churners.

Scores are composed of ~5–7 
subscores such as reliability, 
accessibility, capacity, voice, 
etc, each with clear values and 
weights.

A best-in-class example would 
leverage customer-level metrics 
(aggregated from session-level 
data) with site-level KPIs and 
handset-generated data. RAN, 
backhaul, and core information 
should also be considered.

Scores for customers who do 
not have a 5G device should only 
leverage previous generations 
of KPIs; similarly, voice 
KPIs should not be used for 
customers who only use data.

The network is the product: How AI can put telco customer experience in focus 

4

 
Exhibit 2 
Telco customers with lower network customer experience (CX) scores have a 
Telco customers with lower network customer experience (CX) scores have 
higher probability of dropping their provider.
a higher probability of dropping their provider.

Churn lift¹ (30 days after) vs average AI-enabled CX score,
results over consumer wireless postpaid population

Churn lift,¹ ratio

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

0–1

1–2

2–3

3–4

4–5

5–6

6–7

7–8

8–9

9–10

AI-enabled CX score, daily average over one month

Distribution, %

38

20

6

27

8

0

0–1

0

1–2

1

2–3

3–4

4–5

5–6

6–7

7–8

AI-enabled CX score, daily average over one month

1

8–9

0

9–10

1Churn in AI-enabled CX score bucket divided by average churn across buckets.
Source: McKinsey analysis

McKinsey & Company

as churn modeling, capital allocation, energy 
optimization, or cross-sell and upsell campaign fine-
tuning, among others. 

Network management. In the network 
management space, the sophisticated scoring 
system can help identify not only where CX can be 
improved to continually create business value but 
also what precisely needs to be done to make those 
improvements. Some examples of specific actions 
include: 

 — Smart capital expenditures and planning 

optimization. To increase the ROI of investments 
in the network, smart capital planning, or smart 

capital expenditures, can be implemented 
by leveraging customer experience 
scores. With a clear understanding of the 
relationships between network performance 
and commercial outcomes, allocating 
capital budgets can advance from educated 
guesstimates to precise targeting. The results 
from potential interventions in different areas 
(with different competitor dynamics) can be 
estimated more accurately and translate the 
effect on commercial outcomes. Following this 
approach, operators can better understand 
what interventions to take in every site for the 
capital plan (for example, a MIMO, or multiple-
input, multiple-output, upgrade to enable more 

The network is the product: How AI can put telco customer experience in focus

5

Exhibit 3 
AI-enabled network customer experience (CX) data can help enhance telco 
AI-enabled network customer experience (CX) data can help enhance telco 
churn models and reduce overall churn.
churn models and reduce overall churn.

Phone voluntary disconnects in month N (illustrative)

Higher churn

Lower churn

High risk

Churn per churn model score decile, %

Low risk

Total (CX)

Potential churners with a bad network
experience  unidentified by the churn model

Additional potential churners identified
thanks to CX score

Clients with high
probability to churn
identified both by the
churn model and CX

Potential churners
with good network
experience (eg,
churn due to pricing)

Bad network
experience

Churn per
CX model
score decile,
%

Good network
experience

Total
(churn model)

Note: Illustrative based on existing case study.
Source: McKinsey analysis

McKinsey & Company

reliable transmission of data, versus a sector 
addition) and which sites to prioritize based on 
the customer impact.  

One telco was able to identify 15 percent of 
investments within its three-year build-out plan 
that would achieve a better ROI with retargeting 
either because its initial plans addressed areas 
with already high scores, because its proposed 
solution did not address the driver of the low 
score, or because the number of customers 
and amount of revenue affected was too low to 
warrant the planned investment. 

commercial outcomes in their tool kit, telcos 
can now assign employees to own the tracking 
of overall scores and subscores, allowing for 
improved performance management. For 
example, operators can understand which 
areas are more affected by network capacity 
and which are more sensitive to network 
reliability (based on customer preferences), 
or where a voice experience is more relevant 
than a data experience, and how well they are 
doing on those dimensions. This knowledge 
can help inform the actions required to 
upgrade the network performance of those 
areas.

 — Network performance management. Having 
a strong understanding of the customer 
experience that is being delivered and the 
drivers behind it can be an unprecedented 
opportunity for network organizations to speak 
the same language. This would hopefully put a 
stop to long-running debates over whether poor 
commercial outcomes are driven by commercial 
considerations or network problems. With a 
single network CX score and clear linkages to 

 — Anomaly detection. Just as telcos routinely 
monitor alarms and KPIs in the network 
operations center, they can monitor CX to 
identify strange events or patterns that could 
signal critical network faults. Monitoring 
network CX this way brings two benefits over 
traditional network monitoring, which consists 
of alarms for individual network elements 
and reliance on customer inquiries. First, it 

The network is the product: How AI can put telco customer experience in focus 

6

 
helps identify complex, or hidden, faults. 
Since a network CX score is composed of 
multiple performance metrics simultaneously 
(voice and data service, capacity, reliability, 
et cetera), it is affected by network faults 
that touch multiple KPIs simultaneously. 
This enables another layer of refinement to 
identifying issues. For example, a 10 percent 
drop in capacity at one site might not appear 
relevant, but a simultaneous 10 percent drop 
in all network performance indicators can 
indicate a major problem.  

The second benefit CX-driven anomaly 
detection has over traditional network 
monitoring is that it is capable of pinpointing 
business-relevant faults. Because CX scores 
are correlated with business outcomes, a 
score drop indicates that customers may have 
cause to churn, contact the call center, or 
complain on other channels. This can redefine 
how operators view “network problems” and 
the criteria to trigger alarms. For instance, a 
15 percent throughput drop might not even 
be considered an event to resolve, but if an 
operator knows that the drop will cause churn 
probability to double in the area, the need to 
respond takes on much greater urgency.

 — Targeted outage repair. The impact a network 
outage has on CX can be used to evaluate 
the severity of business outcomes stemming 
from an already identified fault. Such repairs 
can be integrated into existing processes to 
change the prioritization of how outages are 
resolved to minimize the effect on customers’ 
perceptions of the network. One telecom 
operator was able to identify a backhaul 
problem affecting multiple sites by monitoring 
CX scores that showed trouble before 
traditional alarms were triggered or specialist 
teams began to investigate the problem. In this 
case, because the backhaul was not working 
properly, customers were not able to connect 
to the network, but capacity KPIs appeared 
to be okay, no RAN alarm was triggered, and 
phones were still connecting. Customers 
called about the problem, but engineers 

didn’t know the root cause. While some 
degradation in a fiber link was evident, this 
was not initially viewed as the problem. Only 
an AI-enabled CX score could synthesize 
the sheer volume of metrics required to 
pinpoint such an issue. When the CX score 
signaled an issue, engineers were able to 
drill down into subscores and individual 
KPIs to identify the specific backhaul 
problem, as well as its severity (including the 
number of customers affected). Manually 
reviewing the vast number of metrics for 
the various network elements involved in 
this identification process would have been 
practically impossible.

 — Energy optimization. By basing energy 

optimization efforts in part on CX scores, 
telcos can maintain or improve individual 
customers’ experience of the network while 
also improving the operator’s overall energy 
usage. For example, power to a site can 
be reduced if doing so would not degrade 
CX, or increased if CX scores indicate a 
measurable improvement would result. This 
level of optimization can be augmented 
further based on the types of customers 
using the site at a given time and their churn 
likelihood. 

Commercial management. Opportunities for 
using customer experience scores to improve 
commercial management include knowing 
whether and how to invest in improving the 
network, deciding which customers should be 
offered a discount or a new phone to mitigate 
the effects of poor experience, increasing 
average revenue per unit (ARPU) at the 
individual level, growing specific markets, 
and optimizing commercial operations. Some 
examples of specific actions are as follows: 

 — Enhanced churn models. As much as 38 

percent of churn is driven by network issues, 
with customers seeking better data speeds 
and voice reception.¹ Research has found 
that in the top half of markets analyzed, 
where network quality is highest, the lead 

1 “10th Annual US Broadband & Wireless Survey: Early Adopters of Fixed Wireless Are Highly Satisfied; Broadband & Mobile Bundles the New 
Battleground,” Morgan Stanley,October 13, 2022.

The network is the product: How AI can put telco customer experience in focus

7

 
service provider enjoys a 31 percent higher 
ARPU and 27 percent lower average churn than 
its peers.² Churn models also can be enhanced 
with AI-driven CX insights, with targeted churn 
reduction actions such as promotions, plan 
changes, and moving customers from prepaid 
to postpaid. 

 — Cross-sell and upsell advances. It stands 

to reason that customers who enjoy better 
network experience are more likely to purchase 
additional products and services. But the 
network is typically not considered when 
launching cross-sell and upsell efforts. The 
failure to take this critical factor into account 
when launching those efforts not only reduces 
the effectiveness of those campaigns but 
might also create a risk: launching a cross-
sell or upsell effort on customers with poor 
network experience might backfire and trigger 
a negative reaction. By integrating CX scores 
in those marketing processes, these sales 
initiatives are likely to be more successful.

 — Early intervention on connectivity issues. 
Individual customers dealing with a poor 
network experience could be offered femto 
cells (small, low-power cellular base stations) or 
mesh units to improve their connectivity. This 
can achieve three to four times as much churn 
reduction over more reactive measures based 
on customer complaints alone. Focusing solely 
on customer complaints can lead to driving 
discounts and giveaways while overlooking 
a full understanding of the root cause of the 
complaint and long-term resolution. 

 — Proactive client communication and call 
routing and prioritization. Building on the 
anomaly detection use case explained 
earlier, once a customer’s experience drops 
significantly, the telco has the ability to 
proactively reach out to the affected users. 
For example, if a tower is knocked out by an 
unavoidable event such as an accident or 
weather, customers could receive a message 
informing them that service will be diminished 
temporarily. Alternatively, call center agents 

can use the same information to acknowledge 
the degradation in service when a customer 
calls to complain, and thereby save both the 
customer and the representative the time and 
frustration of figuring out what the problem is.

 — Device or plan upgrades. Customers could 
also be proactively offered upgrades if they 
are still using fourth-generation (4G) LTE 
devices in areas where fifth-generation (5G) 
is prevalent. Customers who have 5G devices 
but 4G LTE plans could be upgraded to a 5G 
plan.

Getting started 
As with most data-related endeavors, building a 
road map for developing improved network CX 
scores is critical to success. Four key elements 
are involved: 

Decide use cases. Knowing what you want to 
do with CX scores will determine what data is 
needed, so deciding the key use cases where the 
score will be used is step one. Churn reduction, 
optimizing capital budget allocation, or optimizing 
call rerouting are good places to start. The data 
required will change slightly depending on the 
use case, as will some modeling design choices 
(for example, churn-related use cases benefit 
from a score that helps identify customers 
experiencing very poor CX, rather than a score 
that differentiates between middle and high 
CX, such as might be required by service-level 
agreements for enterprise or government 
contracts).

Assess existing performance data. 
Understanding what network performance 
data is currently available is also important. The 
more sophisticated approach to CX scoring has 
demanding data requirements involving highly 
granular information that, in some cases, is not 
readily available. For most telcos, some amount 
of new data preparation (including creation and 
collection) will be necessary, and this can easily 
become overwhelming. As digital transformation 
proliferates, telcos’ data maturity has improved 

2 Börje Ekholm, “Why network quality is more important than ever,” Ericsson, March 30, 2020. 

The network is the product: How AI can put telco customer experience in focus 

8

markedly. Still, this remains a massive challenge 
for telcos, whose core product—the network—
generates staggeringly vast amounts of data 
every day. And every operator and its OEMs 
collect data in different ways, which becomes 
even more complex if they acquire or merge with 
another operator. 

At a minimum, building an AI to use CX in this 
new way will require network performance data 
at a customer level—either per session or by 
combining meters and customer connections to 
sites, at least every hour, for all customers and 
sites as described in the defined journey (4G 
phone lines, for example). A minimum of 60 days’ 
worth of data stored is also needed. This data will 
be combined with commercial information, which 
might include churn, calls to customer service, or 
subscriber plan. 

Build on any past efforts. Many operators 
have tried to develop similar metrics in the past, 
prior to today’s AI advances and data maturity 
achievements. Those previous efforts can still be 
helpful, as the data investments involved further 
the goal of deriving clear insights from vast 
data collections and can be combined as inputs 
alongside additional data points to produce these 
AI-driven CX measurements. 

Define the journey. As with any other data 
and analytics effort, the journey is more likely 
to succeed if it is done progressively. Starting 
small to achieve initial successes and then 

building on those with increased complexity is 
usually better than tackling the most complex 
and granular ambitions first. Once an initial 
CX-based score is developed for a use case, 
more and increasingly complex scores and 
use cases can be developed, in a process 
of successive releases, akin to software 
development. For example, operators can start 
their journey with a focus on understanding 
the daily experience of 4G phone lines before 
moving to hourly IoT CX measurements. This 
approach can reduce the number of data sets 
that need to be combined at first, and the 
complexity involved. 

The opportunity to adopt an objective, 
AI-enabled method for tracking and optimizing 
customer experience as a key driver of decision 
making is a ray of light during the prolonged era 
of challenging economics for telecom operators. 
Anticipating and preventing the problems 
that diminish customers’ experience of the 
network, and linking business outcomes to that 
experience, can be a source of renewed growth 
and innovation for the industry. This is only the 
beginning of how network operators can use 
AI to their benefit, however. Using AI to develop 
a deeper and more precise understanding of 
network CX can serve as a first milestone in a 
broader AI network transformation. 

Borja Belda is an associate partner in McKinsey’s New York office, where Tomás Lajous is a senior partner; 
Sebastian Cubela is a partner in the Miami office; Brendan Gaffey is a senior partner and global coleader of 
the Technology, Media & Telecommunications Practice, based in the Dallas office; and Sebastián González is a 
consultant in the Stamford office.

The authors wish to thank Venkat Atluri, Bernardo Branco, Aniruddha Chauhan, Guilherme Cruz, Kayvaun 
Rowshankish, Sanchit Tiwari, and Andrea Travasoni for their contributions to this article.

Copyright © 2024 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.

The network is the product: How AI can put telco customer experience in focus

9

