Technology, Media & Telecommunications Practice 

The keys to deploying fiber 
networks faster and cheaper

Four tactics can improve telecom companies’ returns on fiber rollouts, helping to 
connect more of the millions of people who remain without high-speed access. 

by Anton Lysenko, Tiago Silveira, and Manglam Tewari 

February 2024

© Getty Images

1

Telecom operators are investing heavily to 
connect more people to high-speed fiber networks. 
In 2022 in Europe and the United States alone, their 
networks reached 15.2 million more households 
than the prior year, compared with the 9.9 million 
they added in 2018.¹ Incumbents, newly formed 
fiber companies, governments, and private 
investors are all active in the sector, to the extent 
that more than one billion homes worldwide now 
have high-speed fiber access.²  

Still, that figure means that some 40 percent of the 
world’s population remains without fiber access, 
indicating significant potential for further growth in 
the fiber-to-the-home (FTTH) market. The extent to 
which companies capture that potential, however, 
could hinge on their ability to improve returns on 

invested capital, as new markets are likely to be 
those with relatively high costs to serve and low 
revenue-generating potential. The most attractive 
markets already have fiber connections.   

Reducing costs wherever possible is therefore 
crucial. But maximizing market share early on 
is critical too, and this depends upon speed to 
market. Experience suggests that the first FTTH 
operator to enter a market—whether overbuilding 
existing networks with fiber or rolling out new 
networks—can win significant market share as 
customers switch from cable and DSL providers. A 
second, later entrant, however, is likely to capture a 
significantly smaller share as the pool of customers 
willing to switch shrinks (Exhibit 1). 

1 “Report finds 18.4 million U.S. fiber broadband homes, highest-ever deployment in 2018,” Telecompetitor, December 11, 2018; “Fiber 
Broadband Association survey counts 68M total FTTH passings in U.S., sharply trending,” Cabling Installation & Maintenance, January 11, 
2023; “EU Telecoms ready for a good 2024,” New Street Research, December 18, 2023.
2 “IDATE – World FTTX markets,” IDATE Market Intelligence, December, 2021.

Exhibit 1 
The first fiber-to-the-home (FTTH) player to enter the market typically gains more 
The first fiber-to-the-home (FTTH) player to enter the market typically 
market share than latecomers.
gains more market share than latecomers.

Estimated broadband terminal market share by technology,1 % of subscribers 

100

40–55

45–60

–20 pp

No FTTH 
players

1 FTTH 
player

1Five to seven years after market entrance; market share is only for the overlapping footprint areas.
Source: IDATE Market Intelligence, expert interviews

McKinsey & Company

Other technologies
(eg, DSL, cable)

1st FTTH entrant

2nd FTTH entrant

15–30

35–50

25–40

2 FTTH 
players

The keys to deploying fiber networks faster and cheaper 

2

Of course, government policies and regulations will 
play a role in shaping market outcomes. To encourage 
high-speed access, governments might, for example, 
allow competitors to deploy fiber on incumbents’ 
ducts and poles, provide financial incentives to create 
wholesale fiber infrastructure companies, or offer 
subsidies to build fiber in rural and remote areas. 

But companies’ own operational capabilities will also 
go a long way in determining how they fare. In our 
view, there are four main ways in which incumbents 
and greenfield companies can improve their internal 
processes to make their network rollouts both faster 
and leaner:

 — Use artificial intelligence (AI) to target low-cost 

markets with high potential penetration levels.

 — Establish an operating model that drives 

coordination and efficiency.

 — Automate resource-intensive functions.

Our experience suggests the combination of these 
tactics can accelerate deployment by as much as 
20 percent while lowering costs by between 15 and 
25 percent, with results discernible within eight to 
sixteen months (Exhibit 2).

Use AI to target low-cost markets with 
high potential penetration levels
Companies looking to roll out new fiber have 
typically targeted markets likely to yield the highest 
revenues, which has often meant focusing on urban 
areas where population density and household 
income levels are high. But as more fiber is laid, 
these high revenue-generating opportunities 
are becoming scarce, requiring companies to put 
greater weight on the cost to serve a market. There’s 
little point in targeting an area with high population 
density if penetration rates are likely to be low 
because of low household income. The cost to serve 
could prove prohibitive.

 — Strike long-term partnerships with suppliers.

Instead, companies will want to identify markets 
where they can find the best balance between 

Exhibit 2 
Four tactics can reduce fiber network deployment costs by 15 to 25 percent.
Four tactics can reduce fiber network deployment costs by 15 to 25 percent.

Fiber network deployment cost reduction, by tactic, %

5–8

5–8

15–25

2–3

3–6

Use AI to target
low-cost,
high-penetration
markets

Establish an
operating model that
drives coordination
and efficiency

Automate
resource-intensive
functions 

Strike long-term
partnerships
with suppliers

Total
potential
impact

Source: McKinsey analysis

McKinsey & Company

The keys to deploying fiber networks faster and cheaper

3

penetration potential, average revenue per user 
(ARPU), and construction costs. This can be a 
complex and time-consuming task given the 
multitude of variables, beyond socio-demographic 
ones, which are likely to impact the balance. These 
include the length of network routes required, 
deployment methods (aerially on poles, using 
existing underground ducts, or trenching new 
ducts), the availability of high-speed backbone 
infrastructure, equipment and labor costs, and 
competitors’ deployment plans. 

AI-assisted planning models are adept at handling 
such analysis and can improve outcomes. The 
experience of one operator illustrates the point. 
Its original fiber build strategy, formulated by an 
experienced team, underperformed. Costs were 
higher and take-up weaker than anticipated. For 
the next deployment phase, the company opted to 
use an AI-assisted planning model that considered 
a huge range of variables; these included the 
distance of every residential building from the 
nearest fiber route, a factor that impacts costs, 
and the number of wireless subscribers in each 
area, a factor that impacts take-up as wireless 
subscribers often upgrade to fiber. As a result, the 
model identified markets where the cost of getting 
fiber to homes was 5 to 7 percent lower than the 
markets initially targeted and potential penetration 
levels up to 10 percent higher, significantly 
enhancing forecast returns.

Building an effective AI planning model starts with 
getting the basics right. All financial, customer, 
and network data will need to be available. There 
should be no gaps and inconsistencies. From 
here, advanced AI models can forecast returns on 
network deployment at a granular level, looking 
at zip codes, city blocks, or even individual 
buildings, for example. And with the addition of 
more parameters, the model can analyze even 
more scenarios, such as where competitors might 
build fiber in the future, helping to minimize the 
risk of overbuilding, or the returns on alternative 
broadband technologies, such as fixed wireless.

Establish an operating model that 
drives coordination and efficiency
Fiber rollouts can only be as fast and efficient 
as a company’s operating model allows. By 
standardizing processes, setting up a harmonized 
IT stack, and establishing a “nerve center” to 
coordinate the project pipeline, companies can 
drive coordination and efficiencies within and 
across functions including network deployment, 
operations, IT, and procurement. These measures 
have the potential to cut deployment costs by a 
percentage point or two while simultaneously 
accelerating deployment.

Standardize nationwide processes. Many 
companies find they have different operational 
processes, procedures, and practices in place 
for different markets, as well as for different 
projects within the same geography, and even 
for different teams working on the same project. 
In some markets, companies outsource design, 
for example, but in others they conduct the work 
internally. In some, they award construction to a 
single company while elsewhere they divvy up the 
work. Some projects might have 20 milestones 
while other similar ones have 30, with comparisons 
made even trickier because of different 
nomenclature. This kind of variance means that 
best practices aren’t always followed, slowing the 
pace of deployment and cranking up construction 
costs as team members learn to adapt to diverse 
ways of working. It can also lead to mistakes, 
necessitating costly rework. 

Standardization helps solve this. It entails the 
meticulous mapping of all steps in the deployment 
process, documenting all relevant best practices, 
and defining governance mechanisms so that any 
deviations from the standard are identified early. 
Regular audits, performance metrics tracking, and 
compliance checks all help in this respect. Change 
management is important too, as all employees will 
need to train to adopt newly established practices. 
Network design and architecture should also be 

The keys to deploying fiber networks faster and cheaper 

4

standardized; that could include establishing the 
optimal distance between nodes, for example.

Harmonize the technology stack. Many operators 
find themselves saddled with cumbersome 
processes and high costs because of the legacy 
tools they use to manage deployment. This can be 
particularly problematic for incumbent operators 
with legacy copper or cable networks that are now 
laying new fiber ones, as well as for companies 
that have expanded through acquisitions. It isn’t 
uncommon to find companies with multiple different 
systems for managing inventory, projects, capital 
deployment and other resources. Consolidation 
of these tools is a lengthy process that requires a 
transition road map aimed at avoiding disruptions, 
but it also offers substantial rewards in terms of cost 
savings and deployment speed. 

One North American broadband company that had 
different deployment tools in each of the regions 
where it operated found itself struggling with 
the quality of its data and rollout effectiveness. 
Inventory entries were missing or duplicated, for 
example, and there were manual, unreliable notes 
regarding the completion of milestones. A phased 
plan that eliminated redundancies and introduced a 
new tech stack with modern, out-of-the-box SaaS 
solutions alongside customized in-house built tools 
quickened the pace of subsequent fiber rollouts by 
almost 10 percent while also reducing deployment 
costs.

Create a nerve center. Problems inevitably arise 
when a company is deploying fiber in dozens of 
different sites and markets and orchestrating 
multiple vendors and material suppliers, threatening 
schedules and budgets. Yet business-as-usual 
processes, whereby individual project teams work 
without visibility across the entire deployment 
program, can be slow to detect such problems 
and their potential impact or to resolve them. For 
example, the fact that a particular supplier has 
failed to deliver on schedule to two sites might go 
unnoticed other than by those working on the sites. 
But the failure could be a sign that the supplier has 

run into significant problems and won’t deliver 
on time to the next ten sites either, seriously 
jeopardizing the deployment schedule. Likewise, a 
decentralized approach can mean work slowing to 
a halt in one place because of a supply shortage, 
even though the needed material is sitting in an 
intermediate warehouse. 

A nerve center, by contrast, collects and 
analyzes data that gives a bird’s eye view of how 
deployment is progressing relative to milestones. 
This might include real-time updates on permitting 
applications, inventory availability, and overall 
construction timelines. With this information, 
the nerve center’s cross-functional team, which 
includes representatives from the various markets, 
IT, procurement, and data analytics, can work in an 
agile manner to resolve issues promptly, as they 
have both the capability and authority to mobilize 
resources and address them themselves, or to 
escalate them when necessary. The nerve center 
established by one operator detected a delay 
in the delivery of specialized fiber-optic cables 
from a key supplier. Procurement approached the 
supplier and ascertained the problem was unlikely 
to improve imminently, prompting the nerve center 
team to reallocate cable stocked in a warehouse 
in a different region—a move that saved further 
project delays and the associated costs.

Automate resource-intensive 
functions
Companies need to manage thousands of tasks 
to deploy new fiber infrastructure. Add in human 
error, and it’s not hard to see why the process is 
often riddled with inefficiencies that slow progress 
and inflate costs. Automation can help remove 
some of them, particularly in the following areas:

Network design. Designing a fiber network is a 
complex process, entailing route planning, node 
placement, capacity and redundancy planning, 
simulation and testing, and more. The process can 
take many months, depending on the project’s 
complexity, topography, and the team’s expertise. 

The keys to deploying fiber networks faster and cheaper

5

But automation can help accelerate it in a variety 
of ways. For example, an automated process can 
generate optimal routes and node locations based 
on topographical data, existing infrastructure, and 
coverage requirements. It can forecast network 
capacity and simulate performance under different 
conditions, such as peak usage or unexpected 
network failures. Importantly, automation also 
frees up employees to focus on higher-value tasks—
perhaps working on designs that might require 
bespoke solutions because of the unique nature of 
a construction site or validating other designs. Our 
experience suggests that automation can reduce 
the time it takes to design networks manually by up 
to 30 percent. 

Site surveys. Automation can cut the time it takes 
operators and their contractors to survey sites for 
deployment. Data collection, terrain analysis, and 
obstacle detection, all once time-intensive tasks 
requiring in-person visits, can now be automated 
with the help of digital twin models that combine 
relevant public and proprietary data, including 
satellite imagery, geospatial databases, and 
elevation models. Site visits only then need to be 
made if data is missing or needs confirmation. Yet 
even here, companies can expedite the process 
with the help of computer vision models and lidar 
sensors that produce high-resolution 3D maps and 
models of the area. Such methods have helped 
speed up certain site survey timelines by between 
20 and 25 percent. 

Permits. Obtaining permits for fiber construction is 
one of the most time-consuming rollout processes, 
often running into weeks or even months. To a 
certain extent, the local authorities or utilities 
issuing the permits dictate timelines. Nonetheless, 
poor management by telco operators can cause 
unnecessary delays. All too often, company 
employees find themselves trawling through 
different websites trying to ascertain which 
data (and in which format) they need to submit 
for dozens of different permits for, say, digging a 
trench or interrupting traffic, then trying to keep 
track of the progress of every application. Even in 
companies where the process is more structured, it 
often remains manual. Establishing a standardized, 

automated permit center—one that understands 
regional permit requirements, collects and 
validates the necessary data, creates and submits 
the permits, and then tracks their progress in 
real time—streamlines the process. As a result, 
it can boost application approval rates by 10 to 
20 percent and cut the time needed to acquire 
permits by as much as 15 percent, while freeing 
up employees to concentrate on verifying more 
complex permit requirements.

Construction management. Project managers 
commonly oversee as many as 500 distinct 
jobs on a project, each involving perhaps 60 
or so individual tasks—these are hugely time-
consuming processes that are almost certain 
to overlook existing or brewing problems. A 
real-time automated construction management 
system drives efficiency by establishing and 
monitoring exactly when all routine tasks and 
activities need to be completed, by whom, and in 
what order, to keep the project on schedule. If a 
milestone is at risk of being missed, the system 
triggers an alert. In this way, project managers 
can dedicate their attention to evaluating the 
impact of any delays and resolving them. In 
addition, many routine tasks can be automated—
creating a bill of materials or dispatching a crew, 
for example—leaving the manager with more 
time to handle complex ones, be that optimizing 
the network topology for maximum efficiency or 
addressing unexpected challenges that arise in 
the field. A real-time construction management 
system can, in our experience, quicken the pace 
of deployment and reduce deployment expenses 
by 5 to 8 percent. 

Strike long-term partnerships with 
suppliers
Building long-term partnerships with suppliers 
in lieu of transactional, one-off relationships 
can offer substantial rewards. Long-term 
partnerships help suppliers plan their production 
schedules and allocate resources in line with 
operators’ needs, giving the relationship a degree 
of stability and predictability that can often 
deliver cost savings greater than those likely to 

The keys to deploying fiber networks faster and cheaper 

6

be achieved through short-term price discounts 
offered in a one-off, competitive bidding process. 
Within a partnership, suppliers may be willing 
to negotiate favorable terms, bulk discounts, 
and customized solutions that extend beyond a 
single project. By working in close collaboration 
with their suppliers, some operators have been 
able to secure a construction cost advantage of 
between 5 and 8 percent over those with a more 
transactional approach to supplier management, 
taking into account the cost of materials and labor.

Collaboration also shields operators from delays 
and disruptions because of a more secure supply 
chain—an advantage some operators have sought 
to maximize by changing their ordering practices. 
Rather than ordering materials a month in 
advance and hoping for timely delivery, they share 
supply forecasts up to a year ahead and commit 
to purchasing a sizable portion of that volume, 
perhaps up to 75 percent. The advance notice 
and demand certainty help suppliers meet their 
obligations, though penalties can still be applied if 
there are fulfillment delays.

Forecasts must, of course, be accurate, which will 
mean installing robust demand planning systems 
that incorporate reliable data and machine 

learning tools that are closely integrated with 
deployment and financial planning. Efficient 
inventory management systems are pivotal too. 
By offering comprehensive visibility into stock 
levels across all stages of the supply chain, 
these systems ensure the availability of the 
right materials at the right locations and times, 
increasing the accuracy of demand forecasts 
shared with vendors.

The speed and costs of fiber deployment are 
central to its viability in many of the world’s 
still unserved markets. The four measures 
described here—using AI to target low-cost, 
high-penetration markets; establishing an 
operating model that drives coordination and 
efficiency; automating resource-intensive 
functions; and striking mutually beneficial, 
long-term partnerships with suppliers—can 
help incumbents and new operators improve 
both measures. Within eight to sixteen months, 
the result could be both higher fiber market 
share and higher ROI, while helping to ensure 
that millions more people get access to high-
speed connections.

Anton Lysenko is an associate partner in McKinsey’s Bay Area office, Tiago Silveira is a partner based in the 
Lisbon office, and Manglam Tewari is an associate partner in the Seattle office.

 The authors wish to thank Fan Gao, Gerardo de Geest, and Diogo Rodrigues for their contributions to this article.

Copyright © 2024 McKinsey & Company. All rights reserved.

The keys to deploying fiber networks faster and cheaper

7

